<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Expositor's Bible: The Books of Chronicles</title>
      <author><name reg="Bennett, William Henry">William Henry Bennett</name></author>
      <respStmt><resp>Edited by</resp> <name>W. Robertson Nicoll</name></respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>July 21, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">40235</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="ar"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-07-21">July 21, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Marcia Books, Colin Bell, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made available
            by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">The Expositor's Bible</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Books of Chronicles</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">William Henry Bennett</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Old Testament Languages and Literature, Mackney and New Colleges; Sometime Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Hodder &amp; Stoughton</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">George H, Doran Company</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
To expound Chronicles in a series which has dealt
with Samuel, Kings, Ezra, and Nehemiah is to
glean scattered ears from a field already harvested.
Sections common to Chronicles with the older histories
have therefore been treated as briefly as is consistent
with preserving the continuity of the narrative. Moreover,
an exposition of Chronicles does not demand
or warrant an attempt to write the history of Judah.
To recombine with Chronicles matter which its
author deliberately omitted would only obscure the
characteristic teaching he intended to convey. On
the one hand, his selection of material has a religious
significance, which must be ascertained by careful
comparison with Samuel and Kings; on the other
hand, we can only do justice to the chronicler as
we ourselves adopt, for the time being, his own
attitude towards the history of Hebrew politics,
literature, and religion. In the more strictly expository
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
parts of this volume I have sought to confine myself
to the carrying out of these principles.
</p>

<p>
Amongst other obligations to friends, I must
specially mention my indebtedness to the Rev. T. H.
Darlow, M.A., for a careful reading of the proof-sheets
and many very valuable suggestions.
</p>

<p>
One object I have had in view has been to attempt
to show the fresh force and clearness with which
modern methods of Biblical study have emphasised
the spiritual teaching of Chronicles.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book I. Introduction.</head>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Date And Authorship.</head>

<p>
Chronicles is a curious literary torso. A comparison
with Ezra and Nehemiah shows that the
three originally formed a single whole. They are
written in the same peculiar late Hebrew style; they
use their sources in the same mechanical way; they are
all saturated with the ecclesiastical spirit; and their
Church order and doctrine rest upon the complete Pentateuch,
and especially upon the Priestly Code. They
take the same keen interest in genealogies, statistics,
building operations, Temple ritual, priests and
Levites, and most of all in the Levitical doorkeepers
and singers. Ezra and Nehemiah form an obvious
continuation of Chronicles; the latter work breaks off
in the middle of a paragraph intended to introduce the
account of the return from the Captivity; Ezra repeats
the beginning of the paragraph and gives its conclusion.
Similarly the register of the high-priests is begun in
1 Chron. vi. 4-15 and completed in Neh. xii. 10, 11.
</p>

<p>
We may compare the whole work to the image in
Daniel's vision whose head was of fine gold, his breast
and arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,
his legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.
Ezra and Nehemiah preserve some of the finest historical
material in the Old Testament, and are our only
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
authority for a most important crisis in the religion of
Israel. The torso that remains when these two books
are removed is of very mixed character, partly borrowed
from the older historical books, partly taken down from
late tradition, and partly constructed according to the
current philosophy of history.
</p>

<p>
The date<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Ezra</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Nehemiah</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Esther</hi>, by Professor Adeney, in <q>Expositor's
Bible.</q></note> of this work lies somewhere between the
conquest of the Persian empire by Alexander and the
revolt of the Maccabees, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, between <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 332 and <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
166. The register in Neh. xii. 10, 11, closes with
Jaddua, the well-known high-priest of Alexander's
time; the genealogy of the house of David in 1 Chron.
iii. extends to about the same date, or, according to
the ancient versions, even down to about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 200.
The ecclesiastical system of the priestly code, established
by Ezra and Nehemiah <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 444, was of such
old standing to the author of Chronicles that he introduces
it as a matter of course into his descriptions
of the worship of the monarchy. Another feature
which even more clearly indicates a late date is the
use of the term <q>king of Persia</q> instead of simply
<q>the King</q> or <q>the Great King.</q> The latter were
the customary designations of the Persian kings while
the empire lasted; after its fall, the title needed to be
qualified by the name <q>Persia.</q> These facts, together
with the style and language, would be best accounted
for by a date somewhere between <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 300 and <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 250.
On the other hand, the Maccabæan struggle revolutionised
the national and ecclesiastical system which
Chronicles everywhere takes for granted, and the silence
of the author as to this revolution is conclusive proof
that he wrote before it began.
</p>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<p>
There is no evidence whatever as to the name of
the author; but his intense interest in the Levites and
in the musical service of the Temple, with its orchestra
and choir, renders it extremely probable that he was a
Levite and a Temple-singer or musician. We might
compare the Temple, with its extensive buildings and
numerous priesthood, to an English cathedral establishment,
and the author of Chronicles to some vicar-choral,
or, perhaps better, to the more dignified precentor. He
would be enthusiastic over his music, a cleric of studious
habits and scholarly tastes, not a man of the world, but
absorbed in the affairs of the Temple, as a monk in the
life of his convent or a minor canon in the politics and
society of the minster close. The times were uncritical,
and so our author was occasionally somewhat
easy of belief as to the enormous magnitude of ancient
Hebrew armies and the splendour and wealth of ancient
Hebrew kings; the narrow range of his interests and
experience gave him an appetite for innocent gossip,
professional or otherwise. But his sterling religious
character is shown by the earnest piety and serene
faith which pervade his work. If we venture to turn
to English fiction for a rough illustration of the position
and history of our chronicler, the name that at once
suggests itself is that of Mr. Harding, the precentor
in <hi rend='italic'>Barchester Towers</hi>. We must however remember
that there is very little to distinguish the chronicler from
his later authorities; and the term <q>chronicler</q> is often
used for <q>the chronicler or one of his predecessors.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Historical Setting.</head>

<p>
In the previous chapter it has been necessary to deal
with the chronicler as the author of the whole
work of which Chronicles is only a part, and to go
over again ground already covered in the volume
on Ezra and Nehemiah; but from this point we can
confine our attention to Chronicles and treat it as a
separate book. Such a course is not merely justified,
it is necessitated, by the different relations of the
chronicler to his subject in Ezra and Nehemiah on the
one hand and in Chronicles on the other. In the
former case he is writing the history of the social and
ecclesiastical order to which he himself belonged, but
he is separated by a deep and wide gulf from the
period of the kingdom of Judah. About three hundred
years intervened between the chronicler and the
death of the last king of Judah. A similar interval
separates us from Queen Elizabeth; but the course of
these three centuries of English life has been an almost
unbroken continuity compared with the changing
fortunes of the Jewish people from the fall of the
monarchy to the early years of the Greek empire.
This interval included the Babylonian captivity and
the return, the establishment of the Law, the use of
the Persian empire, and the conquests of Alexander.
</p>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<p>
The first three of these events were revolutions of
supreme importance to the internal development of
Judaism; the last two rank in the history of the world
with the fall of the Roman empire and the French
Revolution. Let us consider them briefly in detail.
The Captivity, the rise of the Persian empire, and the
Return are closely connected, and can only be treated
as features of one great social, political, and religious
convulsion, an upheaval which broke the continuity of
all the strata, of Eastern life and opened an impassable
gulf between the old order and the new. For a time,
men who had lived through these revolutions were still
able to carry across this gulf the loosely twisted strands
of memory, but when they died the threads snapped;
only here and there a lingering tradition supplemented
the written records. Hebrew slowly ceased to be
the vernacular language, and was supplanted by
Aramaic; the ancient history only reached the people
by means of an oral translation. Under this new
dispensation the ideas of ancient Israel were no longer
intelligible; its circumstances could not be realised by
those who lived under entirely different conditions.
Various causes contributed to bring about this change.
First, there was an interval of fifty years, during which
Jerusalem lay a heap of ruins. After the recapture of
Rome by Totila the Visigoth in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 546 the city was
abandoned during forty days to desolate and dreary
solitude. Even this temporary depopulation of the
Eternal City is emphasised by historians as full of
dramatic interest, but the fifty years' desolation of
Jerusalem involved important practical results. Most
of the returning exiles must have either been born in
Babylon or else have spent all their earliest years in
exile. Very few can have been old enough to have
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
grasped the meaning or drunk in the spirit of the older
national life. When the restored community set to
work to rebuild their city and their temple, few of them
had any adequate knowledge of the old Jerusalem, with
its manners, customs, and traditions. <q>The ancient
men, that had seen the first house, wept with a loud
voice</q><note place='foot'>Ezra iii. 12.</note> when the foundation of the second Temple
was laid before their eyes. In their critical and disparaging
attitude towards the new building, we may
see an early trace of the tendency to glorify and idealise
the monarchical period, which culminated in Chronicles.
The breach with the past was widened by the novel
and striking surroundings of the exiles in Babylon.
For the first time since the Exodus, the Jews as a
nation found themselves in close contact and intimate
relations with the culture of an ancient civilisation and
the life of a great city.
</p>

<p>
Nearly a century and a half elapsed between the
first captivity under Jehoiachin (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 598) and the
mission of Ezra (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 458); no doubt in the succeeding
period Jews still continued to return from Babylon to
Judæa, and thus the new community at Jerusalem,
amongst whom the chronicler grew up, counted
Babylonian Jews amongst their ancestors for two or
even for many generations. A Zulu tribe exhibited
for a year in London could not return and build their
kraal afresh and take up the old African life at the
point where they had left it. If a community of
Russian Jews went to their old home after a few years'
sojourn in Whitechapel, the old life resumed would be
very different from what it was before their migration.
Now the Babylonian Jews were neither uncivilised
African savages nor stupefied Russian helots; they
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
were not shut up in an exhibition or in a ghetto; they
settled in Babylon, not for a year or two, but for half a
century or even a century; and they did not return to
a population of their own race, living the old life, but
to empty homes and a ruined city. They had tasted
the tree of new knowledge, and they could no more live
and think as their fathers had done than Adam and
Eve could find their way back into paradise. A large
and prosperous colony of Jews still remained at
Babylon, and maintained close and constant relations
with the settlement in Judæa. The influence of
Babylon, begun during the Exile, continued permanently
in this indirect form. Later still the Jews felt
the influence of a great Greek city, through their
colony at Alexandria.
</p>

<p>
Besides these external changes, the Captivity was a
period of important and many-sided development of
Jewish literature and religion. Men had leisure to
study the prophecies of Jeremiah and the legislation of
Deuteronomy; their attention was claimed for Ezekiel's
suggestions as to ritual, and for the new theology,
variously expounded by Ezekiel, the later Isaiah, the
book of Job, and the psalmists. The Deuteronomic
school systematised and interpreted the records of the
national history. In its wealth of Divine revelation
the period from Josiah to Ezra is only second to the
apostolic age.
</p>

<p>
Thus the restored Jewish community was a new
creation, baptised into a new spirit; the restored city
was as much a new Jerusalem as that which St. John
beheld descending out of heaven; and, in the words of
the prophet of the Restoration, the Jews returned to a
<q>new heaven and a new earth.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. lxvi. 22.</note> The rise of the
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
Persian empire changed the whole international system
of Western Asia and Egypt. The robber monarchies
of Nineveh and Babylon, whose energies had been
chiefly devoted to the systematic plunder of their
neighbours, were replaced by a great empire, that
stretched out one hand to Greece and the other to
India. The organisation of this great empire was the
most successful attempt at government on a large scale
that the world had yet seen. Both through the Persians
themselves and through their dealings with the Greeks,
Aryan philosophy and religion began to leaven Asiatic
thought; old things were passing away: all things were
becoming new.
</p>

<p>
The establishment of the Law by Ezra and Nehemiah
was the triumph of a school whose most important and
effective work had been done at Babylon, though not
necessarily within the half-century specially called the
Captivity. Their triumph was retrospective: it not only
established a rigid and elaborate system unknown to
the monarchy, but, by identifying this system with the
law traditionally ascribed to Moses, it led men very
widely astray as to the ancient history of Israel. A
later generation naturally assumed that the good kings
must have kept this law, and that the sin of the bad
kings was their failure to observe its ordinances.
</p>

<p>
The events of the century and a half or thereabouts
between Ezra and the chronicler have only a minor
importance for us. The change of language from
Hebrew to Aramaic, the Samaritan schism, the few
political incidents of which any account has survived,
are all trivial compared to the literature and history
crowded into the century after the fall of the monarchy.
Even the far-reaching results of the conquests of
Alexander do not materially concern us here. Josephus
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
indeed tells us that the Jews served in large numbers
in the Macedonian army, and gives a very dramatic
account of Alexander's visit to Jerusalem; but the
historical value of these stories is very doubtful, and in
any case it is clear that between <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 333 and <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 250
Jerusalem was very little affected by Greek influences,
and that, especially for the Temple community to which
the chronicler belonged, the change from Darius to
the Ptolemies was merely a change from one foreign
dominion to another.
</p>

<p>
Nor need much be said of the relation of the chronicler
to the later Jewish literature of the Apocalypses
and Wisdom. If the spirit of this literature were
already stirring in some Jewish circles, the chronicler
himself was not moved by it. Ecclesiastes, as far as
he could have understood it, would have pained and
shocked him. But his work lay in that direct line of
subtle rabbinic teaching which, beginning with Ezra,
reached its climax in the Talmud. Chronicles is really
an anthology gleaned from ancient historic sources and
supplemented by early specimens of Midrash and
Hagada.
</p>

<p>
In order to understand the book of Chronicles, we
have to keep two or three simple facts constantly and
clearly in mind. In the first place, the chronicler was
separated from the monarchy by an aggregate of
changes which involved a complete breach of continuity
between the old and the new order: instead of a nation
there was a Church; instead of a king there were a high-priest
and a foreign governor. Secondly, the effects of
these changes had been at work for two or three
hundred years, effacing all trustworthy recollection
of the ancient order and schooling men to regard the
Levitical dispensation as their one original and antique
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
ecclesiastical system. Lastly, the chronicler himself
belonged to the Temple community, which was the
very incarnation of the spirit of the new order. With
such antecedents and surroundings, he set to work to
revise the national history recorded in Samuel and
Kings. A monk in a Norman monastery would have
worked under similar but less serious disadvantages if
he had undertaken to rewrite the <hi rend='italic'>Ecclesiastical History</hi>
of the Venerable Bede.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Sources And Mode Of Composition.</head>

<p>
Our impressions as to the sources of Chronicles
are derived from the general character of its
contents, from a comparison with other books of the
Old Testament, and from the actual statements of
Chronicles itself. To take the last first: there are
numerous references to authorities in Chronicles which
at first sight seem to indicate a dependence on rich and
varied sources. To begin with, there are <q>The Book
of the Kings of Judah and Israel,</q><note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Asa</hi> (2 Chron. xvi. 11); <hi rend='italic'>Amaziah</hi> (2 Chron. xxv. 26);
<hi rend='italic'>Ahaz</hi> (2 Chron. xxviii. 26).</note> <q>The Book of the
Kings of Israel and Judah,</q><note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Jotham</hi> (2 Chron. xxvii. 7); <hi rend='italic'>Josiah</hi> (2 Chron. xxxv.
26, 27).</note> and <q>The Acts of the
Kings of Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Manasseh</hi> (2 Chron. xxxiii, 18).</note> These, however, are obviously
different forms of the title of the same work.
</p>

<p>
Other titles furnish us with an imposing array of
prophetic authorities. There are <q>The <emph>Words</emph></q> of
Samuel the Seer<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>David</hi> (1 Chron. xxix. 29).</note>, of Nathan the Prophet,<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>David</hi> (1 Chron. xxix. 29) and <hi rend='italic'>Solomon</hi> (2 Chron.
ix. 29).</note> of Gad the
Seer,<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>David</hi> (1 Chron. xxix. 29).</note> of Shemaiah the Prophet and of Iddo the Seer,<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Rehoboam</hi> (2 Chron. xii. 15).</note>
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
of Jehu the son of Hanani,<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Jehoshaphat</hi> (2 Chron. xx. 34).</note> and of the Seers<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Manasseh</hi> (2 Chron. xxxiii. 19). <q>Seers,</q> A.V., R.V.
Marg., with LXX.; R.V., with Hebrew text, <q>Hozai.</q> The passage
is probably corrupt.</note>;
<q>The <emph>Vision</emph></q> of Iddo the Seer<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Solomon</hi> (2 Chron. ix. 29).</note> and of Isaiah the
Prophet<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Hezekiah</hi> (2 Chron. xxxii. 32).</note>; <q>The <emph>Midrash</emph></q> of the Book of Kings<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Joash</hi> (2 Chron. xxiv. 27).</note> and
of the Prophet Iddo<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Abijah</hi> (2 Chron. xiii, 22).</note>; <q>The <emph>Acts</emph> of Uzziah,</q> written
by Isaiah the Prophet<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Uzziah</hi> (2 Chron. xxvi. 22).</note>; and <q>The <emph>Prophecy</emph></q> of
Ahijah the Shilonite.<note place='foot'>Quoted for <hi rend='italic'>Solomon</hi> (2 Chron. ix. 29).</note> There are also less formal
allusions to other works.
</p>

<p>
Further examination, however, soon discloses the
fact that these prophetic titles merely indicate different
sections of <q>The Book of the Kings of Israel and
Judah.</q> On turning to our book of Kings, we find
that from Rehoboam onwards each of the references
in Chronicles corresponds to a reference by the book
of Kings to the <q>Chronicles<note place='foot'>Cf. pp. 17, 18.</note> of the Kings of Judah.</q>
In the case of Ahaziah, Athaliah, and Amon, the reference
to an authority is omitted both in the books of
Kings and Chronicles. This close correspondence
suggests that both our canonical books are referring
to the same authority or authorities. Kings refers to
the <q>Chronicles of the Kings of Judah</q> for Judah, and
to the <q>Chronicles of the Kings of Israel</q> for the
northern kingdom; Chronicles, though only dealing
with Judah, combines these two titles in one: <q>The
Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah.</q>
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
In two instances Chronicles clearly states that its
prophetic authorities were found as sections of the
larger work. <q>The Words of Jehu the son of Hanani</q>
were <q>inserted in the Book of the Kings of Israel,</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xx. 34.</note>
and <q>The Vision of Isaiah the Prophet, the son of
Amoz,</q> is in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel.<note place='foot'>Chron. xxxii. 32.</note>
It is a natural inference that the other <q>Words</q> and
<q>Visions</q> were also found as sections of this same
<q>Book of Kings.</q>
</p>

<p>
These conclusions may be illustrated and supported
by what we know of the arrangement of the contents
of ancient books. Our convenient modern subdivisions
of chapter and verse did not exist, but the Jews were
not without some means of indicating the particular
section of a book to which they wished to refer. Instead
of numbers they used names, derived from the
subject of a section or from the most important person
mentioned in it. For the history of the monarchy the
prophets were the most important personages, and each
section of the history is named after its leading prophet
or prophets. This nomenclature naturally encouraged
the belief that the history had been originally written
by these prophets. Instances of the use of such nomenclature
are found in the New Testament, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Rom.
xi. 2: <q>Wot ye not what the Scripture saith in Elijah</q><note place='foot'>R.V. marg.</note>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
in the section about Elijah&mdash;and Mark xii. 26:
<q>Have ye not read in the book of Moses in the place
concerning the bush?</q><note place='foot'>R.V.</note>
</p>

<p>
While, however, most of the references to <q>Words,</q>
<q>Visions,</q> etc., are to sections of the larger work,
we need not at once conclude that <emph>all</emph> references to
authorities in Chronicles are to this same book. The
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
genealogical register in 1 Chron. v. 17 and the <q>lamentations</q>
of 2 Chron. xxxv. 25 may very well be independent
works. Having recognised the fact that the
numerous authorities referred to by Chronicles were for
the most part contained in one comprehensive <q>Book
of Kings,</q> a new problem presents itself: What are the
respective relations of our Kings and Chronicles to the
<q>Chronicles</q> and <q>Kings</q> cited by them? What are
the relations of these original authorities to each other?
What are the relations of our Kings to our Chronicles?
Our present nomenclature is about as confusing as it
well could be; and we are obliged to keep clearly in
mind, first, that the <q>Chronicles</q> mentioned in Kings
is not our Chronicles, and then that the <q>Kings</q>
referred to by Chronicles is not our Kings. The first
fact is obvious; the second is shown by the terms of
the references, which state that information not furnished
in Chronicles may be found in the <q>Book of
Kings,</q> but the information in question is often not
given in the canonical Kings.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, the wars of Jotham (2 Chron. xxvii. 7).</note> And yet the connection
between Kings and Chronicles is very close and extensive.
A large amount of material occurs either identically
or with very slight variations in both books. It is
clear that either Chronicles uses Kings, or Chronicles
uses a work which used Kings, or both Chronicles and
Kings use the same source or sources. Each of these
three views has been held by important authorities,
and they are also capable of various combinations and
modifications.
</p>

<p>
Reserving for a moment the view which specially
commends itself to us, we may note two main tendencies
of opinion. First, it is maintained that Chronicles
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
either goes back directly to the actual sources of Kings,
citing them, for the sake of brevity, under a combined
title, or is based upon a combination of the main
sources of Kings made at a very early date. In either
case Chronicles as compared with Kings would be
an independent and parallel authority on the contents
of these early sources, and to that extent would rank
with Kings as first-class history. This view, however,
is shown to be untenable by the numerous traces
of a later age which are almost invariably present
wherever Chronicles supplements or modifies Kings.
</p>

<p>
The second view is that either Chronicles used Kings,
or that the <q>Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah</q>
used by Chronicles was a post-Exilic work, incorporating
statistical matter and dealing with the history of the
two kingdoms in a spirit congenial to the temper and
interests of the restored community. This <q>post-Exilic</q>
predecessor of Chronicles is supposed to have been
based upon Kings itself, or upon the sources of Kings,
or upon both; but in any case it was not much earlier
than Chronicles and was written under the same influences
and in a similar spirit. Being virtually an earlier
edition of Chronicles, it could claim no higher authority,
and would scarcely deserve either recognition or treatment
as a separate work. Chronicles would still rest
substantially on the authority of Kings.
</p>

<p>
It is possible to accept a somewhat simpler view,
and to dispense with this shadowy and ineffectual first
edition of Chronicles. In the first place, the chronicler
does not appeal to the <q>Words</q> and <q>Visions</q> and
the rest of his <q>Book of Kings</q> as authorities for his
own statements; he merely refers his reader to them
for further information which he himself does not
furnish. This <q>Book of Kings</q> so often mentioned
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
is therefore neither a source nor an authority of
Chronicles. There is nothing to prove that the
chronicler himself was actually acquainted with the
book. Again, the close correspondence already noted
between these references in Chronicles and the parallel
notes in Kings suggests that the former are simply
expanded and modified from the latter, and the
chronicler had never seen the book he referred to.
The Books of Kings had stated where additional information
could be found, and Chronicles simply repeated
the reference without verifying it. As some sections
of Kings had come to be known by the names of certain
prophets, the chronicler transferred these names back
to the corresponding sections of the sources used by
Kings. In these cases he felt he could give his readers
not merely the somewhat vague reference to the original
work as a whole, but the more definite and convenient
citation of a particular paragraph. His descriptions
of the additional subjects dealt with in the original
authority may possibly, like other of his statements,
have been constructed in accordance with his ideas
of what that authority should contain; or more probably
they refer to this authority the floating traditions of
later times and writers. Possibly these references and
notes of Chronicles are copied from the glosses which
some scribe had written in the margin of his copy
of Kings. If this be so, we can understand why we
find references to the Midrash of Iddo and the Midrash
of the book of Kings.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xiii. 22; xxiv. 27. The LXX., however, does not read
<q>Midrash</q> in either case; and it is quite possible that glosses have
attached themselves to the text of Chronicles.</note>
</p>

<p>
In any case, whether directly or through the medium
of a preliminary edition, called <q>The Book of the Kings
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
of Israel and Judah,</q> our book of Kings was used
by the chronicler. The supposition that the original
sources of Kings were used by the chronicler or this
immediate predecessor is fairly supported both by
evidence and authority, but on the whole it seems an
unnecessary complication.
</p>

<p>
Thus we fail to find in these various references to
the <q>Book of Kings,</q> etc., any clear indication of the
origin of matter peculiar to Chronicles; nevertheless
it is not difficult to determine the nature of the sources
from which this material was derived. Doubtless some
of it was still current in the form of oral tradition when
the chronicler wrote, and owed to him its permanent
record. Some he borrowed from manuscripts, which
formed part of the scanty and fragmentary literature
of the later period of the Restoration. His genealogies
and statistics suggest the use of public and ecclesiastical
archives, as well as of family records, in which ancient
legend and anecdote lay embedded among lists of
forgotten ancestors. Apparently the chronicler harvested
pretty freely from that literary aftermath that
sprang up when the Pentateuch and the earlier historical
books had taken final shape.
</p>

<p>
But it is to these earlier books that the chronicler
owes most. His work is very largely a mosaic of paragraphs
and phrases taken from the older books. His
chief sources are Samuel and Kings; he also lays the
Pentateuch, Joshua, and Ruth under contribution. Much
is taken over without even verbal alteration, and the
greater part is unaltered in substance; yet, as is the
custom in ancient literature, no acknowledgment is
made. The literary conscience was not yet aware of
the sin of plagiarism. Indeed, neither an author nor
his friends took any pains to secure the permanent
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
association of his name with his work, and no great
guilt can attach to the plagiarism of one anonymous
writer from another. This absence of acknowledgment
where the chronicler is plainly borrowing from elder
scribes is another reason why his references to the
<q>Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah</q> are clearly
not statements of sources to which he is indebted, but
simply what they profess to be: indications of the
possible sources of further information.
</p>

<p>
Chronicles, however, illustrates ancient methods of
historical composition, not only by its free appropriation
of the actual form and substance of older works, but
also by its curious blending of identical reproduction
with large additions of quite heterogeneous matter, or
with a series of minute but significant alterations.
The primitive ideas and classical style of paragraphs
from Samuel and Kings are broken in upon by the
ritualistic fervour and late Hebrew of the chronicler's
additions. The vivid and picturesque narrative of the
bringing of the Ark to Zion is interpolated with
uninteresting statistics of the names, numbers, and
musical instruments of the Levites.<note place='foot'>Cf. 2 Sam. vi. 12-20 with 1 Chron. xv., xvi.</note> Much of the
chronicler's account of the revolution which overthrew
Athaliah and placed Joash on the throne is taken
word for word from the book of Kings; but it is
adapted to the Temple order of the Pentateuch by
a series of alterations which substitute Levites for
foreign mercenaries, and otherwise guard the sanctity
of the Temple from the intrusion, not only of foreigners,
but even of the common people.<note place='foot'>Cf. 2 Kings xi.; 2 Chron. xxiii.</note> A careful comparison
of Chronicles with Samuel and Kings is a striking
object lesson in ancient historical composition. It is
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
an almost indispensable introduction to the criticism
of the Pentateuch and the older historical books. The
<q>redactor</q> of these works becomes no mere shadowy
and hypothetical personage when we have watched his
successor the chronicler piecing together things new
and old and adapting ancient narratives to modern
ideas by adding a word in one place and changing
a phrase in another.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Importance of Chronicles.</head>

<p>
Before attempting to expound in detail the
religious significance of Chronicles, we may conclude
our introduction by a brief general statement of
the leading features which render the book interesting
and valuable to the Christian student.
</p>

<p>
The material of Chronicles may be divided into
three parts: the matter taken directly from the older
historical books; material derived from traditions and
writings of the chronicler's own age; the various
additions and modifications which are the chronicler's
own work.<note place='foot'>The last two classes are not easily distinguished; but the additions
which introduce the Levitical system into earlier history are
clearly the work of the chronicler or his immediate predecessor,
if such a predecessor be assumed, or were found in somewhat late
sources. This is also probably true of other explanatory matter.</note> Each of these divisions has its special
value, and important lessons may be learnt from the
way in which the author has selected and combined
these materials.
</p>

<p>
The excerpts from the older histories are, of course,
by far the best material in the book for the period of
the monarchy. If Samuel and Kings had perished,
we should have been under great obligations to the
chronicler for preserving to us large portions of their
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
ancient records. As it is, the chronicler has rendered
invaluable service to the textual criticism of the Old
Testament by providing us with an additional witness
to the text of large portions of Samuel and Kings.
The very fact that the character and history of
Chronicles are so different from those of the older
books enhances the value of its evidence as to their
text. The two texts, Samuel and Kings on the one
hand and Chronicles on the other, have been modified
under different influences; they have not always been
altered in the same way, so that where one has been
corrupted the other has often preserved the correct
reading. Probably because Chronicles is less interesting
and picturesque, its text has been subject to less
alteration than that of Samuel and Kings. The more
interested scribes or readers become, the more likely
they are to make corrections and add glosses to the
narrative. We may note, for example, that the name
<q>Meribbaal</q> given by Chronicles for one of Saul's sons
is more likely to be correct than <q>Mephibosheth,</q> the
form given by Samuel.<note place='foot'>Cf. 2 Sam. iv. with 1 Chron. viii. 34, also 2 Sam. vii. 7 with
1 Chron. xvii. 6, and 2 Sam. xvii. 25 with 1 Chron. ii. 17. In both
these instances Chronicles preserves the correct text.</note>
</p>

<p>
The material derived from traditions and writings
of the chronicler's own age is of uncertain historical
value, and cannot be clearly discriminated from the
author's free composition. Much of it was the natural
product of the thought and feeling of the late Persian
and early Greek period, and shares the importance
which attaches to the chronicler's own work. This
material, however, includes a certain amount of neutral
matter: genealogies, family histories and anecdotes,
and notes on ancient life and custom. We have no
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
parallel authorities to test this material, we cannot
prove the antiquity of the sources from which it is
derived, and yet it may contain fragments of very
ancient tradition. Some of the notes and narratives
have an archaic flavour which can scarcely be artificial;
their very lack of importance is an argument for their
authenticity, and illustrates the strange tenacity with
which local and domestic tradition perpetuates the
most insignificant episodes.<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chapter_IV'>Book II., Chap. IV.</ref></note>
</p>

<p>
But naturally the most characteristic, and therefore
the most important, section of the contents of Chronicles
is that made up of the additions and modifications
which are the work of the chronicler or his immediate
predecessors. It is unnecessary to point out that these
do not add much to our knowledge of the history of the
monarchy; their significance consists in the light that
they throw upon the period towards whose close the
chronicler lived: the period between the final establishment
of Pentateuchal Judaism and the attempt of
Antiochus Epiphanes to stamp it out of existence; the
period between Ezra and Judas Maccabæus. The
chronicler is no exceptional and epoch-making writer,
has little personal importance, and is therefore all the
more important as a typical representative of the
current ideas of his class and generation. He translates
the history of the past into the ideas and circumstances
of his own age, and thus gives us almost as much
information about the civil and religious institutions
he lived under as if he had actually described them.
Moreover, in stating its estimate of past history, each
generation pronounces unconscious judgment upon
itself. The chronicler's interpretation and philosophy
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
of history mark the level of his moral and spiritual
ideas. He betrays these quite as much by his attitude
towards earlier authorities as in the paragraphs which
are his own composition; we have seen how his use
of materials illustrates the ancient, and for that matter
the modern, Eastern methods of historical composition,
and we have shown the immense importance of
Chronicles to Old Testament criticism. But the way
in which the chronicler uses his older sources also
indicates his relation towards the ancient morality,
ritual, and theology of Israel. His methods of selection
are most instructive as to the ideas and interests of
his time. We see what was thought worthy to be
included in this final and most modern edition of the
religious history of Israel. But in truth the omissions
are among the most significant features of Chronicles;
its silence is constantly more eloquent than its speech,
and we measure the spiritual progress of Judaism by
the paragraphs of Kings which Chronicles leaves out.
In subsequent chapters we shall seek to illustrate the
various ways in which Chronicles illuminates the period
preceding the Maccabees. Any gleams of light on the
Hebrew monarchy are most welcome, but we cannot
be less grateful for information about those obscure
centuries which fostered the quiet growth of Israel's
character and faith and prepared the way for the
splendid heroism and religious devotion of the Maccabæan
struggle.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book II. Genealogies.</head>


<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Names. 1 Chron. i-ix.</head>

<p>
The first nine chapters of Chronicles form, with
a few slight exceptions, a continuous list of
names. It is the largest extant collection of Hebrew
names. Hence these chapters may be used as a text
for the exposition of any spiritual significance to be
derived from Hebrew names either individually or
collectively. Old Testament genealogies have often
exercised the ingenuity of the preacher, and the student
of homiletics will readily recollect the methods of
extracting a moral from what at first sight seems a
barren theme. For instance, those names of which
little or nothing is recorded are held up as awful
examples of wasted lives. We are asked to take
warning from Mahalalel and Methuselah, who spent
their long centuries so ineffectually that there was
nothing to record except that they begat sons and
daughters and died. Such teaching is not fairly
derived from its text. The sacred writers implied no
reflection upon the Patriarchs of whom they gave so
short and conventional an account. Least of all could
such teaching be based upon the lists in Chronicles,
because the men who are there merely mentioned by
name include Adam, Noah, Abraham, and other heroes
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
of sacred story. Moreover, such teaching is unnecessary
and not altogether wholesome. Very few men
who are at all capable of obtaining a permanent place
in history need to be spurred on by sermons; and for
most people the suggestion that a man's life is a
failure unless he secures posthumous fame is false
and mischievous. The Lamb's book of life is the
only record of the vast majority of honourable and
useful lives; and the tendency to self-advertisement
is sufficiently wide-spread and spontaneous already: it
needs no pulpit stimulus. We do not think any worse
of a man because his tombstone simply states his name
and age, or any better because it catalogues his virtues
and mentions that he attained the dignity of alderman
or author.
</p>

<p>
The significance of these lists of names is rather to
be looked for in an opposite direction. It is not that
a name and one or two commonplace incidents mean
so little, but that they suggest so much. A mere parish
register is not in itself attractive, but if we consider
even such a list, the very names interest us and kindle
our imagination. It is almost impossible to linger in
a country churchyard, reading the half-effaced inscriptions
upon the headstones, without forming some dim
picture of the character and history and even the
outward semblance of the men and women who once
bore the names.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>For though a name is neither</q></l>
<l>... hand, nor foot,</l>
<l>Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Belonging to a man,</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
yet, to use a somewhat technical phrase, it <emph>connotes</emph> a
man. A name implies the existence of a distinct
personality, with a peculiar and unique history, and
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
yet, on the other hand, a being with whom we are
linked in close sympathy by a thousand ties of common
human nature and everyday experience. In its lists
of what are now mere names, the Bible seems to
recognise the dignity and sacredness of bare human
life.
</p>

<p>
But the names in these nine chapters have also
a collective significance: they stand for more than
their individual owners. They are typical and representative,
the names of kings, and priests, and captains;
they sum up the tribes of Israel, both as a Church and
a nation, down all the generations of its history. The
inclusion of these names in the sacred record, as the
express introduction to the annals of the Temple, and
the sacred city, and the elect house of David, is the
formal recognition of the sanctity of the nation and of
national life. We are entirely in the spirit of the
Bible when we see this same sanctity in all organised
societies: in the parish, the municipality, and the state;
when we attach a Divine significance to registers of
electors and census returns, and claim all such lists
as symbols of religious privilege and responsibility.
</p>

<p>
But names do not merely suggest individuals and
communities: the meanings of the names reveal the
ideas of the people who used them. It has been well
said that <q>the names of every nation are an important
monument of national spirit and manners, and
thus the Hebrew names bear important testimony to
the peculiar vocation of this nation. No nation of
antiquity has such a proportion of names of religious
import.</q><note place='foot'>Oehler, <hi rend='italic'>Old Testament Theology</hi>, i. 283 (Eng. trans.).</note> Amongst ourselves indeed the religious
meaning of names has almost wholly faded away;
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
<q>Christian name</q> is a mere phrase, and children are
named after relations, or according to prevailing fashion,
or after the characters of popular novels. But the
religious motive can still be traced in some modern
names; in certain districts of Germany the name
<q>Ursula</q> or <q>Apollonia</q> is a sure indication that a
girl is a Roman Catholic and has been named after a
popular saint.<note place='foot'>Nestle, <hi rend='italic'>Die Israelitischen Eigennamen</hi>, p. 27. The present chapter
is largely indebted to this standard monograph.</note> The Bible constantly insists upon this
religious significance, which would frequently be in the
mind of the devout Israelite in giving names to his
children. The Old Testament contains more than a
hundred etymologies<note place='foot'>Nestle.</note> of personal names, most of which
attach a religious meaning to the words explained.
The etymologies of the patriarchal names&mdash;<q>Abraham,</q>
father of a multitude of nations; <q>Isaac,</q> laughter;
<q>Jacob,</q> supplanter; <q>Israel,</q> prince with God&mdash;are
specially familiar. The Biblical interest in edifying
etymologies was maintained and developed by early
commentators. Their philology was far from accurate,
and very often they were merely playing upon the forms
of words. But the allegorising tendencies of Jewish
and Christian expositors found special opportunities in
proper names. On the narrow foundation of an etymology
mostly doubtful and often impossible, Philo, and
Origen, and Jerome loved to erect an elaborate structure
theological or philosophical doctrine. Philo has only
one quotation from our author: <q>Manasseh had sons,
whom his Syrian concubine bare to him, Machir; and
Machir begat Gilead.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. vii. 14.</note> He quotes this verse to show
that recollection is associated in a subordinate capacity
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
with memory. The connection is not very clearly made
out, but rests in some way on the meaning of Manasseh,
the root of which means to forget. As forgetfulness
with recollection restores our knowledge, so Manasseh
with his Syrian concubine begets Machir. Recollection
therefore is a concubine, an inferior and secondary
quality.<note place='foot'>Philo, <hi rend='italic'>De Cong. Quær. Erud. Grat.</hi>, 8.</note> This ingenious trifling has a certain charm
in spite of its extravagance, but in less dexterous
hands the method becomes clumsy as well as extravagant.
It has, however, the advantage of readily
adapting itself to all tastes and opinions, so that we
are not surprised when an eighteenth-century author
discovers in Old Testament etymology a compendium
of Trinitarian theology.<note place='foot'>Hiller's <hi rend='italic'>Onomasticon ap.</hi>, Nestle 11.</note> <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ahiah</foreign><note place='foot'>vii. 8.</note> is derived from <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>'ehad</foreign>,
one, and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>yah</foreign>, Jehovah, and is thus an assertion of the
Divine unity; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Reuel</foreign><note place='foot'>i. 35.</note> is resolved into a plural verb with
a singular Divine name for its subject: this is an indication
of trinity in unity; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ahilud</foreign><note place='foot'>xviii. 15.</note> is derived from <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>'ehad</foreign>,
one, and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>galud</foreign>, begotten, and signifies that the Son is
<emph>only-begotten</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Modern scholarship is more rational in its methods, but
attaches no less importance to these ancient names, and
finds in them weighty evidence on problems of criticism
and theology; and before proceeding to more serious
matters, we may note a few somewhat exceptional names.
As pointed in the present Hebrew text, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hazarmaveth</foreign><note place='foot'>i. 20.</note>
and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Azmaveth</foreign><note place='foot'>viii. 36.</note> have a certain grim suggestiveness.
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hazarmaveth</foreign>, court of death, is given as the name of
a descendant of Shem. It is, however, probably the
name of a place transferred to an eponymous ancestor,
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
and has been identified with <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hadramawt</foreign>, a district in
the south of Arabia. As, however, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hadramawt</foreign>, is a
fertile district of Arabia Felix, the name does not seem
very appropriate. On the other hand <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Azmaveth</foreign>,
<q>strength of death,</q> would be very suitable for some
strong, death-dealing soldier. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Azubah</foreign>,<note place='foot'>ii. 18.</note> <q>forsaken,</q>
the name of Caleb's wife, is capable of a variety of
romantic explanations. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hazelelponi</foreign><note place='foot'>iii. 20.</note> is remarkable in
its mere form; and Ewald's interpretation, <q>Give shade,
Thou who turnest to me Thy countenance,</q> seems
rather a cumbrous signification for the name of a
daughter of the house of Judah. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jushab-hesed</foreign>,<note place='foot'>iv. 3.</note> <q>Mercy
will be renewed,</q> as the name of a son of Zerubbabel,
doubtless expresses the gratitude and hope of the
Jews on their return from Babylon.<note place='foot'>Bertheau, i. 1.</note> <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jashubi-lehem</foreign>,<note place='foot'>iv. 22.</note>
however, is curious and perplexing. The name has been
interpreted <q>giving bread</q> or <q>turning back to Bethlehem,</q>
but the text is certainly corrupt, and the passage
is one of many into which either the carelessness of
scribes or the obscurity of the chronicler's sources
has introduced hopeless confusion. But the most
remarkable set of names is found in 1 Chron. xxv. 4,
where <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Giddalti</foreign> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Romantiezer</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Joshbekashah</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Mallothi</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hothir</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Mahazioth</foreign>, are simply a Hebrew sentence
meaning, <q>I have magnified and exalted help; sitting
in distress,<note place='foot'>iv. 22.</note> I have spoken<note place='foot'>The translation of these words is not quite certain.</note> visions in abundance.</q>
We may at once set aside the cynical suggestion that
the author lacked names to complete a genealogy and,
to save the trouble of inventing them separately, took
the first sentence that came to hand and cut it up into
suitable lengths, nor is it likely that a father would
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
spread the same process over several years and adopt
it for his family. This remarkable combination of
names is probably due to some misunderstanding of
his sources on the part of the chronicler. His parchment
rolls must often have been torn and fragmentary,
the writing blurred and half illegible; and his attempts
to piece together obscure and ragged manuscripts
naturally resulted at times in mistakes and confusion.
</p>

<p>
These examples of interesting etymologies might
easily be multiplied; they serve, at any rate, to indicate
a rich mine of suggestive teaching. It must,
however, be remembered that a name is not necessarily
a personal name because it occurs in a genealogy;
cities, districts, and tribes mingle freely with persons
in these lists. In the same connection we note that
the female names are few and far between, and that
of those which do occur the <q>sisters</q> probably stand
for allied and related families, and not for individuals.
</p>

<p>
As regards Old Testament theology, we may first
notice the light thrown by personal names on the relation
of the religion of Israel to that of other Semitic
peoples. Of the names in these chapters and elsewhere,
a large proportion are compounded of one or other of
the Divine names. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El</foreign> is the first element in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elishama</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Eliphelet</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Eliada</foreign>, etc.; it is the second in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Othniel</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehaleleel</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Asareel</foreign>, etc. Similarly <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehovah</foreign> is represented
by the initial <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jeho-</foreign> in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehoshaphat</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehoiakim</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehoram</foreign>, etc., by the final <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>-iah</foreign> in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Amaziah</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Azariah</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hezekiah</foreign>, etc. It has been calculated that there are
a hundred and ninety names<note place='foot'>Nestle, p. 68.</note> beginning or ending
with the equivalent of Jehovah, including most of the
kings of Judah and many of the kings of Israel.
Moreover, some names which have not these prefixes
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
and affixes in their extant form are contractions of
older forms which began or ended with a Divine name.
Ahaz, for instance, is mentioned in Assyrian inscriptions
as Jahuhazi&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Jehoahaz&mdash;and Nathan is probably a
contracted form of Nethaniah.
</p>

<p>
There are also numerous compounds of other Divine
names. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zur</foreign>, rock, is found in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Pedahzur</foreign>,<note place='foot'>Num. i. 10.</note> <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shaddai</foreign>,
A.V. Almighty, in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ammishaddai</foreign><note place='foot'>Num. i. 12.</note>; the two are combined
in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zurishaddai</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Num. i. 6.</note> <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Melech</foreign> is a Divine name in
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Malchi-ram</foreign> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Malchi-shua</foreign>. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Baal</foreign> occurs as a Divine
name in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Eshbaal</foreign> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Meribbaal</foreign>. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abi</foreign>, father, is a
Divine name in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abiram</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abinadab</foreign>, etc., and probably
also <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ahi</foreign> in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ahiram</foreign> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ammi</foreign> in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Amminadab</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cf. p. 40.</note> Possibly,
too, the apparently simple names <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Melech</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zur</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Baal</foreign>, are contractions of longer forms in which these
Divine names were prefixes or affixes.
</p>

<p>
This use of Divine names is capable of very varied
illustration. Modern languages have Christian and
Christopher, Emmanuel, Theodosius, Theodora, etc.;
names like Hermogenes and Heliogabalus are found
in the classical languages. But the practice is specially
characteristic of Semitic languages. Mohammedan
princes are still called <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>Abdurrahman</foreign>, servant of the
Merciful, and <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>Abdallah</foreign>, servant of God; ancient Phœnician
kings were named <foreign rend='italic'>Ethbaal</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Abdalonim</foreign>, where
<foreign rend='italic'>alonim</foreign> is a plural Divine name, and the <foreign rend='italic'>bal</foreign> in Hannibal
and Hasdrubal = <foreign rend='italic'>baal</foreign>. The Assyrian and Chaldæan
kings were named after the gods Sin, Nebo, Assur,
Merodach, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, <foreign rend='italic'>Sin-akki-irib</foreign> (Sennacherib); <foreign rend='italic'>Nebuchadnezzar</foreign>;
<foreign rend='italic'>Assur-bani-pal</foreign>; <foreign rend='italic'>Merodach-baladan</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Of these Divine names El and Baal are common to
Israel and other Semitic peoples, and it has been held
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
that the Hebrew personal names preserve traces of
polytheism. In any case, however, the Baal-names
are comparatively few, and do not necessarily indicate
that Israelites worshipped a Baal distinct from Jehovah;
they may be relics of a time when Baal (Lord) was a
title or equivalent of Jehovah, like the later Adonai.
Other possible traces of polytheism are few and doubtful.
In Baanah and Resheph we may perhaps find
the obscure<note place='foot'>xi. 30; vii. 25 (Nestle).</note> Phœnician deities Anath and Reshaph.
On the whole, Hebrew names as compared, for instance,
with Assyrian afford little or no evidence of the prevalence
of polytheism.
</p>

<p>
Another question concerns the origin and use of the
name Jehovah. Our lists conclusively prove its free
use during the monarchy and its existence under the
judges. On the other hand, its apparent presence in
Jochebed, the name of the mother of Moses, seems to
carry it back beyond Moses. Possibly it was a Divine
name peculiar to his family or clan. Its occurrence in
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yahubidi</foreign>, a king of Hamath, in the time of Sargon
may be due to direct Israelite influence. Hamath had
frequent relations with Israel and Judah.
</p>

<p>
Turning to matters of practical religion, how far do
these names help us to understand the spiritual life of
ancient Israel? The Israelites made constant use of
El and Jehovah in their names, and we have no parallel
practice. Were they then so much more religious than
we are? Probably in a sense they were. It is true
that the etymology and even the original significance
of a name in common use are for all practical purposes
quickly and entirely forgotten. A man may go through
a life-time bearing the name of Christopher and never
know its etymological meaning. At Cambridge and
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
Oxford sacred names like <q>Jesus</q> and <q>Trinity</q> are
used constantly and familiarly without suggesting anything
beyond the colleges so called. The edifying
phrase, <q>God encompasseth us,</q> is altogether lost in
the grotesque tavern sign <q>The Goat and Compasses.</q>
Nor can we suppose that the Israelite or the Assyrian
often dwelt on the religious significance of the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jeho-</foreign> or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>-iah</foreign>,
the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Nebo</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sin</foreign>, or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Merodach</foreign>, of current proper
names. As we have seen, the sense of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>-iah</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>-el</foreign>,
or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jeho-</foreign> was often so little present to men's minds
that contractions were formed by omitting them. Possibly
because these prefixes and affixes were so
common, they came to be taken for granted; it was
scarcely necessary to write them, because in any case
they would be understood. Probably in historic times
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abi-</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ahi-</foreign>, and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ammi-</foreign> were no longer recognised as
Divine names or titles; and yet the names which could
still be recognised as compounded of El and Jehovah
must have had their influence on popular feeling.
They were part of the religiousness, so to speak, of
the ancient East; they symbolised the constant intertwining
of religious acts, and words, and thoughts with
all the concerns of life. The quality of this ancient
religion was very inferior to that of a devout and
intelligent modern Christian; it was perhaps inferior
to that of Russian peasants belonging to the Greek
Church; but ancient religion pervaded life and society
more consciously than modern Christianity does; it
touched all classes and occasions more directly, if also
more mechanically. And, again, these names were not
the fossil relics of obsolete habits of thought and
feeling, like the names of our churches and colleges;
they were the memorials of comparatively recent
acts of faith. The name <q>Elijah</q> commemorated the
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
solemn occasion on which a father professed his own
faith and consecrated a new-born child to the true
God by naming his boy <q>Jehovah is my God.</q> This
name-giving was also a prayer: the child was placed
under the protection of the deity whose name it bore.
The practice might be tainted with superstition; the
name would often be regarded as a kind of amulet;
and yet we may believe that it could also serve to
express a parent's earnest and simple-minded faith.
Modern Englishmen have developed a habit of almost
complete reticence and reserve on religious matters,
and this habit is illustrated by our choice of proper
names. Mary, and Thomas, and James are so familiar
that their Scriptural origin is forgotten, and therefore
they are tolerated; but the use of distinctively Scriptural
Christian names is virtually regarded as bad
taste. This reticence is not merely due to increased
delicacy of spiritual feeling: it is partly the result of
the growth of science and of literary and historical
criticism. We have become absorbed in the wonderful
revelations of methods and processes; we are fascinated
by the ingenious mechanism of nature and society.
We have no leisure to detach our thoughts from the
machinery and carry them further on to its Maker and
Director. Indeed, because there is so much mechanism
and because it is so wonderful, we are sometimes asked
to believe that the machine made itself. But this is
a mere phase in the religious growth of mankind:
humanity will tire of some of its new toys, and will
become familiar with the rest; deeper needs and
instincts will reassert themselves; and men will find
themselves nearer in sentiment than they supposed
to the ancient people who named their children after
their God. In this and other matters the East to-day
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
is the same as of old; the permanence of its custom is
no inapt symbol of the permanence of Divine truth,
which revolution and conquest are powerless to
change.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The East bowed low before the blast</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In patient, deep disdain;</l>
<l>She let the legions thunder past,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>And plunged in thought again.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But the Christian Church is mistress of a more compelling
magic than even Eastern patience and tenacity:
out of the storms that threaten her, she draws new
energies for service, and learns a more expressive
language in which to declare the glory of God.
</p>

<p>
Let us glance for a moment at the meanings of the
group of Divine names given above. We have said
that, in addition to <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Melech</foreign> in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Malchi-</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abi</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ahi</foreign>, and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ammi</foreign> are to be regarded as Divine names. One
reason for this is that their use as prefixes is strictly
analogous to that of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El</foreign> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jeho-</foreign>. We have <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abijah</foreign>
and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ahijah</foreign> as well as <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elijah</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abiel</foreign> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ammiel</foreign> as
well as <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Eliel</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abiram</foreign> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ahiram</foreign> as well as <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehoram</foreign>;
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ammishaddai</foreign> compares with <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zurishaddai</foreign>, and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ammizabad</foreign>
with <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehozabad</foreign>, nor would it be difficult to add
many other examples. If this view be correct, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ammi</foreign>
will have nothing to do with the Hebrew word for
<q>people,</q> but will rather be connected with the corresponding
Arabic word for <q>uncle.</q><note place='foot'>Nestle.</note> As the use of
such terms as <q>brother</q> and <q>uncle</q> for Divine names
is not consonant with Hebrew theology in its historic
period, the names which contain these prefixes must
have come down from earlier ages, and were used in
later times without any consciousness of their original
sense. Probably they were explained by new etymologies
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
more in harmony with the spirit of the times;
compare the etymology <q>father of a multitude of
nations</q> given to Abraham. Even <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Abi-</foreign>, father, in the
early times to which its use as a prefix must be referred,
cannot have had the full spiritual meaning which now
attaches to it as a Divine title. It probably only signified
the ultimate source of life. The disappearance of
these religious terms from the common vocabulary and
their use in names long after their significance had
been forgotten are ordinary phenomena in the development
of language and religion. How many of the
millions who use our English names for the days of the
week ever give a thought to Thor or Freya? Such
phenomena have more than an antiquarian interest.
They remind us that religious terms, and phrases, and
formulæ derive their influence and value from their
adaptation to the age which accepts them; and therefore
many of them will become unintelligible or even
misleading to later generations. Language varies continuously,
circumstances change, experience widens, and
every age has a right to demand that Divine truth
shall be presented in the words and metaphors that
give it the clearest and most forcible expression. Many
of the simple truths that are most essential to salvation
admit of being stated once for all; but dogmatic
theology fossilises fast, and the bread of one generation
may become a stone to the next.
</p>

<p>
The history of these names illustrates yet another
phenomenon. In some narrow and imperfect sense the
early Semitic peoples seem to have called God <q>Father</q>
and <q>Brother.</q> Because the terms were limited to a
narrow sense, the Israelites grew to a level of religious
truth at which they could no longer use them; but as
they made yet further progress they came to know more
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
of what was meant by fatherhood and brotherhood,
and gained also a deeper knowledge of God. At length
the Church resumed these ancient Semitic terms; and
Christians call God <q>Abba, Father,</q> and speak of the
Eternal Son as their elder Brother. And thus sometimes,
but not always, an antique phrase may for a time
seem unsuitable and misleading, and then again may
prove to be the best expression for the newest and
fullest truth. Our criticism of a religious formula may
simply reveal our failure to grasp the wealth of meaning
which its words and symbols can contain.
</p>

<p>
Turning from these obsolete names to those in
common use&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El</foreign>; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehovah</foreign>; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shaddai</foreign>; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zur</foreign>; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Melech</foreign>&mdash;probably
the prevailing idea popularly associated with
them all was that of strength: <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El</foreign>, strength in the
abstract; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehovah</foreign>, strength shown in permanence and
independence; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shaddai</foreign>, the strength that causes terror,
the Almighty from whom cometh destruction<note place='foot'>Joel i. 15; Isa. xiii. 6. It is not necessary here to discuss either
the etymological or the theological history of these words in their
earliest usage, nor need we do more than recall the fact that Jehovah
was the term in common use as the personal name of the God of
Israel, while El was rare and sometimes generic.</note>; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zur</foreign>,
rock, the material symbol of strength, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Melech</foreign>, king,
the possessor of authority. In early times the first
and most essential attribute of Deity is power, but
with this idea of strength a certain attribute of beneficence
is soon associated. The strong God is the Ally
of His people; His permanence is the guarantee of their
national existence; He destroys their enemies. The
rock is a place of refuge; and, again, Jehovah's people
may rejoice in the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land. The King leads them to battle, and gives them
their enemies for a spoil.
</p>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
We must not, however, suppose that pious Israelites
would consciously and systematically discriminate
between these names, any more than ordinary Christians
do between God, Lord, Father, Christ, Saviour,
Jesus. Their usage would be governed by changing
currents of sentiment very difficult to understand and
explain after the lapse of thousands of years. In the
year <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 3000, for instance, it will be difficult for the
historian of dogmatics to explain accurately why some
nineteenth-century Christians preferred to speak of
<q>dear Jesus</q> and others of <q>the Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
But the simple Divine names reveal comparatively
little; much more may be learnt from the numerous
compounds they help to form. Some of the more
curious have already been noticed, but the real significance
of this nomenclature is to be looked for in the
more ordinary and natural names. Here, as before,
we can only select from the long and varied list. Let
us take some of the favourite names and some of the
roots most often used, almost always, be it remembered,
in combination with Divine names. The different
varieties of these sacred names rendered it possible
to construct various personal names embodying the
same idea. Also the same Divine name might be used
either as prefix or affix. For instance, the idea that
<q>God knows</q> is equally well expressed in the names
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Eliada</foreign> (El-yada'), <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jediael</foreign> (Yada'-el), <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehoiada</foreign> (Jeho-yada'),
and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jedaiah</foreign> (Yada'-yah). <q>God remembers</q>
is expressed alike by <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zachariah</foreign> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jozachar</foreign>; <q>God
hears</q> by <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elishama</foreign> (El-shama'), <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Samuel</foreign> (if for
Shama'-el), <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ishmael</foreign> (also from Shama'-el), <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shemaiah</foreign>,
and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ishmaiah</foreign> (<emph>both from</emph> Shama' <emph>and</emph> Yah); <q>God
gives</q> by <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elnathan</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Nethaneel</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jonathan</foreign>, and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Nethaniah</foreign>;
<q>God helps</q> by <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Eliezer</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Azareel</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Joezer</foreign>, and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Azariah</foreign>;
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
<q>God is gracious</q> by <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elhanan</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hananeel</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Johanan</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hananiah</foreign>, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Baal-hanan</foreign>, and, for a Carthaginian,
<foreign rend='italic'>Hannibal</foreign>, giving us a curious connection between
the Apostle of love, John (Johanan), and the deadly
enemy of Rome.
</p>

<p>
The way in which the changes are rung upon these
ideas shows how the ancient Israelites loved to dwell
upon them. Nestle reckons that in the Old Testament
sixty-one persons have names formed from the root
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nathan</foreign>, to give; fifty-seven from <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>shama</foreign>, to hear;
fifty-six from <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>'azar</foreign>, to help; forty-five from <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hanan</foreign>, to
be gracious; forty-four from <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>zakhar</foreign>, to remember.
Many persons, too, bear names from the root <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>yada'</foreign>,
to know. The favourite name is <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zechariah</foreign>, which is
borne by twenty-five different persons.
</p>

<p>
Hence, according to the testimony of names, the
Israelites' favourite ideas about God were that He heard,
and knew, and remembered; that He was gracious, and
helped men, and gave them gifts: but they loved best
to think of Him as God the Giver. Their nomenclature
recognises many other attributes, but these take the
first place. The value of this testimony is enhanced
by its utter unconsciousness and naturalness; it brings
us nearer to the average man in his religious moments
than any psalm or prophetic utterance. Men's chief
interest in God was as the Giver. The idea has proved
very permanent; St. James amplifies it: God is the
Giver of every good and perfect gift. It lies latent
in names: Theodosius, Theodore, Theodora, and
Dorothea. The other favourite ideas are all related
to this. God hears men's prayers, and knows their
needs, and remembers them; He is gracious, and helps
them by His gifts. Could anything be more pathetic
than this artless self-revelation? Men's minds have
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
little leisure for sin and salvation; they are kept down
by the constant necessity of preserving and providing
for a bare existence. Their cry to God is like the
prayer of Jacob, <q>If Thou wilt give me bread to eat
and raiment to put on!</q> The very confidence and
gratitude that the names express imply periods of doubt
and fear, when they said, <q>Can God prepare a table
in the wilderness?</q> times when it seemed to them
impossible that God could have heard their prayer or
that He knew their misery, else why was there no
deliverance? Had God forgotten to be gracious? Did
He indeed remember? The names come to us as
answers of faith to these suggestions of despair.
</p>

<p>
Possibly these old-world saints were not more preoccupied
with their material needs than most modern
Christians. Perhaps it is necessary to believe in a
God who rules on earth before we can understand the
Father who is in heaven. Does a man really trust in God
for eternal life if he cannot trust Him for daily bread?
But in any case these names provide us with very
comprehensive formulæ, which we are at liberty to
apply as freely as we please: the God who knows,
and hears, and remembers, who is gracious, and helps
men, and gives them gifts. To begin with, note how
in a great array of Old Testament names God is the
Subject, Actor, and Worker; the supreme facts of life
are God and God's doings, not man and man's doings,
what God is to man, not what man is to God. This is
a foreshadowing of the Christian doctrines of grace and
of the Divine sovereignty. And again we are left to
fill in the objects of the sentences for ourselves: God
hears, and remembers, and gives&mdash;what? All that we
have to say to Him and all that we are capable of
receiving from Him.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Heredity. 1 Chron. i.-ix.</head>

<p>
It has been said that Religion is the great discoverer
of truth, while Science follows her slowly and after
a long interval. Heredity, so much discussed just now,
is sometimes treated as if its principles were a great
discovery of the present century. Popular science is
apt to ignore history and to mistake a fresh nomenclature
for an entirely new system of truth, and yet
the immense and far-reaching importance of heredity
has been one of the commonplaces of thought ever
since history began. Science has been anticipated, not
merely by religious feeling, but by a universal instinct.
In the old world political and social systems have been
based upon the recognition of the principle of heredity,
and religion has sanctioned such recognition. Caste
in India is a religious even more than a social institution;
and we use the term figuratively in reference to
ancient and modern life, even when the institution has
not formally existed. Without the aid of definite civil
or religious law the force of sentiment and circumstances
suffices to establish an informal system of caste.
Thus the feudal aristocracy and guilds of the Middle
Ages were not without their rough counterparts in the
Old Testament. Moreover, the local divisions of the
Hebrew kingdoms corresponded in theory, at any rate,
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
to blood relationships; and the tribe, the clan, and the
family had even more fixity and importance than now
belong to the parish or the municipality. A man's
family history or genealogy was the ruling factor in
determining his home, his occupation, and his social
position. In the chronicler's time this was especially
the case with the official ministers of religion, the
Temple establishment to which he himself belonged.
The priests, the Levites, the singers, and doorkeepers
formed castes in the strict sense of the word. A man's
birth definitely assigned him to one of these classes, to
which none but the members of certain families could
belong.
</p>

<p>
But the genealogies had a deeper significance.
Israel was Jehovah's chosen people, His son, to whom
special privileges were guaranteed by solemn covenant.
A man's claim to share in this covenant depended on
his genuine Israelite descent, and the proof of such
descent was an authentic genealogy. In these chapters
the chronicler has taken infinite pains to collect
pedigrees from all available sources and to construct
a complete set of genealogies exhibiting the lines of
descent of the families of Israel. His interest in this
research was not merely antiquarian: he was investigating
matters of the greatest social and religious importance
to all the members of the Jewish community, and
especially to his colleagues and friends in the Temple
service. These chapters, which seem to us so dry and
useless, were probably regarded by the chronicler's
contemporaries as the most important part of his work.
The preservation or discovery of a genealogy was
almost a matter of life and death. Witness the episode
in Ezra and Nehemiah<note place='foot'>Ezra ii. 61-63; Neh. vii, 63-65.</note>: <q>And of the priests: the
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
children of Hobaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the
children of Barzillai, which took a wife of the daughters
of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their
name. These sought their register among those that
were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found; therefore
they were deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.
And the governor said unto them that they
should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood
up a priest with Urim and Thummim.</q> Cases like
these would stimulate our author's enthusiasm. As
he turned over dusty receptacles, and unrolled frayed
parchments, and painfully deciphered crabbed and
faded script, he would be excited by the hope of discovering
some mislaid genealogy that would restore
outcasts to their full status and privileges as Israelites
and priests. Doubtless he had already acquired in
some measure the subtle exegesis and minute casuistry
that were the glory of later Rabbinism. Ingenious
interpretation of obscure writing or the happy emendation
of half-obliterated words might lend opportune
aid in the recovery of a genealogy. On the other hand,
there were vested interests ready to protest against the
too easy acceptance of new claims. The priestly
families of undoubted descent from Aaron would not
thank a chronicler for reviving lapsed rights to a share
in the offices and revenues of the Temple. This
part of our author's task was as delicate as it was
important.
</p>

<p>
We will now briefly consider the genealogies in
these chapters in the order in which they are given.
Chap. i. contains genealogies of the patriarchal period
selected from Genesis. The existing races of the
world are all traced back through Shem, Ham, and
Japheth to Noah, and through him to Adam. The
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
chronicler thus accepts and repeats the doctrine of
Genesis that God made of one every nation of men for
to dwell on all the face of the earth.<note place='foot'>Acts xvii. 26.</note> All mankind,
<q>Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision,
barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman,</q><note place='foot'>Col. iii. 11.</note> were alike
descended from Noah, who was saved from the Flood
by the special care of God; from Enoch, who walked
with God; from Adam, who was created by God in His
own image and likeness. The Israelites did not claim,
like certain Greek clans, to be the descendants of a
special god of their own, or, like the Athenians, to have
sprung miraculously from sacred soil. Their genealogies
testified that not merely Israelite nature, but human
nature, is moulded on a Divine pattern. These apparently
barren lists of names enshrine the great principles
of the universal brotherhood of men and the
universal Fatherhood of God. The chronicler wrote
when the broad universalism of the prophets was being
replaced by the hard exclusiveness of Judaism; and yet,
perhaps unconsciously, he reproduces the genealogies
which were to be one weapon of St. Paul in his struggle
with that exclusiveness. The opening chapters of
Genesis and Chronicles are among the foundations of
the catholicity of the Church of Christ.
</p>

<p>
For the antediluvian period only the Sethite genealogy
is given. The chronicler's object was simply to
give the origin of existing races; and the descendants of
Cain were omitted, as entirely destroyed by the Flood.
Following the example of Genesis, the chronicler
gives the genealogies of other races at the points at
which they diverged from the ancestral line of Israel,
and then continues the family history of the chosen
race. In this way the descendants of Japheth and
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
Ham, the non-Abrahamic Semites, the Ishmaelites, the
sons of Keturah, and the Edomites are successively
mentioned.
</p>

<p>
The relations of Israel with Edom were always close
and mostly hostile. The Edomites had taken advantage
of the overthrow of the southern kingdom to appropriate
the south of Judah, and still continued to occupy
it. The keen interest felt by the chronicler in Edom
is shown by the large space devoted to the Edomites.
The close contiguity of the Jews and Idumæans
tended to promote mutual intercourse between them,
and even threatened an eventual fusion of the two
peoples. As a matter of fact, the Idumæan Herods
became rulers of Judæa. To guard against such
dangers to the separateness of the Jewish people, the
chronicler emphasises the historical distinction of race
between them and the Edomites.
</p>

<p>
From the beginning of the second chapter onwards
the genealogies are wholly occupied with Israelites.
The author's special interest in Judah is at once manifested.
After giving the list of the twelve Patriarchs
he devotes two and a half chapters to the families of
Judah. Here again the materials have been mostly
obtained from the earlier historical books. They are,
however, combined with more recent traditions, so that
in this chapter matter from different sources is pieced
together in a very confusing fashion. One source of
this confusion was the principle that the Jewish community
could only consist of families of genuine Israelite
descent. Now a large number of the returned exiles
traced their descent to two brothers, Caleb and Jerahmeel;
but in the older narratives Caleb and Jerahmeel
are not Israelites. Caleb is a Kenizzite,<note place='foot'>Josh. xiv. 6.</note> and his descendants
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
and those of Jerahmeel appear in close
connection with the Kenites.<note place='foot'>1 Sam. xxvii 10.</note> Even in this chapter
certain of the Calebites are called Kenites and connected
in some strange way with the Rechabites.<note place='foot'>Ver. 55.</note> Though
at the close of the monarchy the Calebites and Jerahmeelites
had become an integral part of the tribe of
Judah, their separate origin had not been forgotten,
and Caleb and Jerahmeel had not been included in the
Israelite genealogies. But after the Exile men came
to feel more and more strongly that a common faith
implied unity of race. Moreover, the practical unity
of the Jews with these Kenizzites overbore the dim
and fading memory of ancient tribal distinctions. Jews
and Kenizzites had shared the Captivity, the Exile, and
the Return; they worked, and fought, and worshipped
side by side; and they were to all intents and purposes
one nation, alike the people of Jehovah. This obvious
and important practical truth was expressed as such
truths were then wont to be expressed. The children
of Caleb and Jerahmeel were finally and formally
adopted into the chosen race. Caleb and Jerahmeel
are no longer the sons of Jephunneh the Kenizzite;
they are the sons of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son
of Judah.<note place='foot'>The occurrence of Caleb the son of Jephunneh in iv, 15, vi. 56,
in no way militates against this view: the chronicler, like other
redactors, is simply inserting borrowed material without correcting it.
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Chelubai</foreign> in ii. 9 stands for <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Caleb</foreign>; cf. ii. 18.</note> A new genealogy was formed as a recognition
rather than an explanation of accomplished facts.
</p>

<p>
Of the section containing the genealogies of Judah,
the lion's share is naturally given to the house of
David, to which a part of the second chapter and the
whole of the third are devoted.
</p>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<p>
Next follow genealogies of the remaining tribes,
those of Levi and Benjamin being by far the most
complete. Chap. vi., which is devoted to Levi, affords
evidence of the use by the chronicler of independent
and sometimes inconsistent sources, and also
illustrates his special interest in the priesthood and the
Temple choir. A list of high-priests from Aaron to
Ahimaaz is given twice over (vv. 4-8 and 49-53), but
only one line of high-priests is recognised, the house
of Zadok, whom Josiah's reforms had made the one
priestly family in Israel. Their ancient rivals the high-priests
of the house of Eli are as entirely ignored as
the antediluvian Cainites. The existing high-priestly
dynasty had been so long established that these other
priests of Saul and David seemed no longer to have
any significance for the religion of Israel.
</p>

<p>
The pedigree of the three Levitical families of
Gershom, Kohath, and Merari is also given twice over:
in vv. 16-30 and 31-49. The former pedigree begins
with the sons of Levi, and proceeds to their descendants;
the latter begins with the founders of the guilds of
singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, and traces back
their genealogies to Kohath, Gershom, and Merari
respectively. But the pedigrees do not agree; compare,
for instance, the lists of the Kohathites:&mdash;
</p>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{2cm} p{2cm}";
             tblcolumns: "lw(15) lw(15)"'>
<row><cell>22-24.</cell><cell>36-38.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kohath</cell><cell>Kohath</cell></row>
<row><cell><emph>Amminadab</emph></cell><cell><emph>Izhar</emph></cell></row>
<row><cell>Korah</cell><cell>Korah</cell></row>
<row><cell><emph>Assir</emph></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell><emph>Elkanah</emph></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Ebiasaph</cell><cell>Ebiasaph</cell></row>
<row><cell>Assir</cell><cell>Assir</cell></row>
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
<row><cell>Tahath</cell><cell>Tahath</cell></row>
<row><cell><emph>Uriel</emph></cell><cell><emph>Zephaniah</emph></cell></row>
<row><cell><emph>Uzziah</emph></cell><cell><emph>Azariah</emph></cell></row>
<row><cell><emph>Shaul</emph></cell><cell>etc.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
We have here one of many illustrations of the fact
that the chronicler used materials of very different
value. To attempt to prove the absolute consistency
of all his genealogies would be mere waste of time. It
is by no means certain that he himself supposed them
to be consistent. The frank juxtaposition of varying
lists of ancestors rather suggests that he was prompted
by a scholarly desire to preserve for his readers all
available evidence of every kind.
</p>

<p>
In reading the genealogies of the tribe of Benjamin,
it is specially interesting to find that in the Jewish
community of the Restoration there were families
tracing their descent through Mephibosheth and
Jonathan to Saul.<note place='foot'>viii. 33-40; ix. 35-44. We have used Mephibosheth as more
familiar, but Chronicles reads Meribbaal, which is more correct.</note> Apparently the chronicler and
his contemporaries shared this special interest in the
fortunes of a fallen dynasty, for the genealogy is given
twice over. These circumstances are the more striking
because in the actual history of Chronicles Saul is all
but ignored.
</p>

<p>
The rest of the ninth chapter deals with the inhabitants
of Jerusalem and the ministry of the Temple
after the return from the Captivity, and is partly
identical with sections of Ezra and Nehemiah. It
closes the family history, as it were, of Israel, and its
position indicates the standpoint and ruling interests
of the chronicler.
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
Thus the nine opening chapters of genealogies and
kindred matter strike the key-notes of the whole book.
Some are personal and professional; some are religious.
On the one hand, we have the origin of existing families
and institutions; on the other hand, we have the election
of the tribe of Judah and the house of David,
of the tribe of Levi and the house of Aaron.
</p>

<p>
Let us consider first the hereditary character of the
Jewish religion and priesthood. Here, as elsewhere,
the formal doctrine only recognised and accepted actual
facts. The conditions which received the sanction of
religion were first imposed by the force of circumstances.
In primitive times, if there was to be any
religion at all, it had to be national; if God was to be
worshipped at all, His worship was necessarily national,
and He became in some measure a national God.
Sympathies are limited by knowledge and by common
interest. The ordinary Israelite knew very little of
any other people than his own. There was little
international comity in primitive times, and nations
were slow to recognise that they had common interests.
It was difficult for an Israelite to believe that his
beloved Jehovah, in whom he had been taught to
trust, was also the God of the Arabs and Syrians, who
periodically raided his crops, and cattle, and slaves, and
sometimes carried off his children, or of the Chaldæans,
who made deliberate and complete arrangements for
plundering the whole country, rasing its cities to the
ground, and carrying away the population into distant
exile. By a supreme act of faith, the prophets claimed
the enemies and oppressors of Israel as instruments
of the will of Jehovah, and the chronicler's genealogies
show that he shared this faith; but it was still inevitable
that the Jews should look out upon the world at
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
large from the standpoint of their own national interests
and experience. Jehovah was God of heaven and
earth; but Israelites knew Him through the deliverance
He had wrought for Israel, the punishments He had
inflicted on her sins, and the messages He had entrusted
to her prophets. As far as their knowledge and
practical experience went, they knew Him as the God
of Israel. The course of events since the fall of
Samaria narrowed still further the local associations
of Hebrew worship.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>God was wroth,</q></l>
<l>And greatly abhorred Israel,</l>
<l>So that He forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh,</l>
<l>The tent which He placed among men;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>He refused the tent of Joseph,</l>
<l>And chose not the tribe of Ephraim,</l>
<l>But chose the tribe of Judah,</l>
<l>The Mount Zion which He loved:</l>
<l>And He built His sanctuary like the heights,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Like the earth, which He hath established for ever.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm lxxviii. 59, 60, 67-69.</note></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
We are doubtless right in criticising those Jews whose
limitations led them to regard Jehovah as a kind of personal
possession, the inheritance of their own nation, and
not of other peoples. But even here we can only blame
their negations. Jehovah <emph>was</emph> their inheritance and
personal possession; but then He was also the inheritance
of other nations. This Jewish heresy is by no
means extinct: white men do not always believe that
their God is equally the God of the negro; Englishmen
are inclined to think that God is the God of England in
a more especial way than He is the God of France.
When we discourse concerning God in history, we
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
mostly mean our own history. We can see the hand
of Providence in the wreck of the Armada and the
overthrow of Napoleon; but we are not so ready to
recognise in the same Napoleon the Divine instrument
that created a new Europe by relieving her peoples
from cruel and degrading tyranny. We scarcely realise
that God cares as much for the Continent as He does
for our island.
</p>

<p>
We have great and perhaps sufficient excuses, but
we must let the Jews have the benefit of them. God is
as much the God of one nation as of another; but He
fulfils Himself to different nations in different ways, by
a various providential discipline. Each people is bound
to believe that God has specially adapted His dealings
to its needs, nor can we be surprised if men forget or
fail to observe that God has done no less for their
neighbours. Each nation rightly regards its religious
ideas, and life, and literature as a precious inheritance
peculiarly its own; and it should not be too severely
blamed for being ignorant that other nations have their
inheritance also. Such considerations largely justify
the interest in heredity shown by the chronicler's
genealogies. On the positive, practical side, religion
<emph>is</emph> largely a matter of heredity, and ought to be. The
Christian sacrament of baptism is a continual profession
of this truth: our children are <q>clean</q>; they are within
the covenant of grace; we claim for them the privileges
of the Church to which we belong. That was also part
of the meaning of the genealogies.
</p>

<p>
In the broad field of social and religious life the
problems of heredity are in some ways less complicated
than in the more exact discussions of physical science.
Practical effects can be considered without attempting
an accurate analysis of causes. Family history not
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
only determines physical constitution, mental gifts, and
moral character, but also fixes for the most part
country, home, education, circumstances, and social
position. All these were a man's inheritance more
peculiarly in Israel than with us; and in many cases
in Israel a man was often trained to inherit a family
profession. Apart from the ministry of the Temple,
we read of a family of craftsmen, of other families that
were potters, of others who dwelt with the king for
his work, and of the families of the house of them that
wrought fine linen.<note place='foot'>iv. 14, 21-23.</note> Religion is largely involved in
the manifold inheritance which a man receives from his
fathers. His birth determines his religious education,
the examples of religious life set before him, the forms
of worship in which as a child he takes part. Most
men live and die in the religion of their childhood; they
worship the God of their fathers; Romanist remains
Romanist: Protestant remains Protestant. They may
fail to grasp any living faith, or may lose all interest in
religion; but such religion as most men have is part of
their inheritance. In the Israel of the chronicler faith
and devotion to God were almost always and entirely
inherited. They were part of the great debt which a
man owed to his fathers.
</p>

<p>
The recognition of these facts should tend to foster
our humility and reverence, to encourage patriotism and
philanthropy. We are the creatures and debtors of the
past, though we are slow to own our obligations. We
have nothing that we have not received; but we are apt
to consider ourselves self-made men, the architects and
builders of our own fortunes, who have the right to be
self-satisfied, self-assertive, and selfish. The heir of
all the ages, in the full vigour of youth, takes his place
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
in the foremost ranks of time, and marches on in the
happy consciousness of profound and multifarious
wisdom, immense resources, and magnificent opportunity.
He forgets or even despises the generations
of labour and anguish that have built up for him his
great inheritance. The genealogies are a silent protest
against such insolent ingratitude. They remind us that
in bygone days a man derived his gifts and received
his opportunities from his ancestors; they show us
men as the links in a chain, tenants for life, as it were,
of our estate, called upon to pay back with interest to
the future the debt which they have incurred to the
past. We see that the chain is a long one, with many
links; and the slight estimate we are inclined to put
upon the work of individuals in each generation recoils
upon our own pride. We also are but individuals of a
generation that is only one of the thousands needed to
work out the Divine purpose for mankind. We are
taught the humility that springs from a sense of obligation
and responsibility.
</p>

<p>
We learn reverence for the workers and achievements
of the past, and most of all for God. We are
reminded of the scale of the Divine working:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>A thousand years in Thy sight</q></l>
<l>Are but as yesterday when it is past</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And as a watch in the night.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
A genealogy is a brief and pointed reminder that God
has been working through all the countless generations
behind us. The bare series of names is an expressive
diagram of His mighty process. Each name in the
earlier lists stands for a generation or even for several
generations. The genealogies go back into dim, prehistoric
periods; they suggest a past too remote for
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
our imagining. And yet they take us back to Adam,
to the very beginning of human life. From that beginning,
however many thousands or tens of thousands
of years ago, the life of man has been sacred, the
object of the Divine care and love, the instrument of
the Divine purpose.
</p>

<p>
Later on we see the pedigree of our race dividing
into countless branches, all of which are represented
in this sacred diagram of humanity. The Divine
working not only extends over all time, but also embraces
all the complicated circumstances and relationships
of the families of mankind. These genealogies
suggest a lesson probably not intended by the
chronicler. We recognise the unique character of the
history of Israel, but in some measure we discern in
this one full and detailed narrative of the chosen people
a type of the history of every race. Others had not
the election of Israel, but each had its own vocation.
God's power, and wisdom, and love are manifested in
the history of one chosen people on a scale commensurate
with our limited faculties, so that we may gain
some faint idea of the marvellous providence in <emph>all</emph>
history of the Father from whom <emph>every</emph> family in heaven
and on earth is named.
</p>

<p>
Another principle closely allied to heredity and
also discussed in modern times is the solidarity of the
race. Humanity is supposed to possess something
akin to a common consciousness, personality, or individuality.
Such a quality evidently becomes more
intense as we narrow its scope from the race to the
nation, the clan, and the family; it has its roots in
family relationships. Tribal, national, humanitarian
feelings indicate that the larger societies have taken
upon themselves something of the character of the
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
family. Thus the common feelings and mutual
sympathies of mankind are due ultimately to blood
relationship. The genealogies that set forth family
histories are the symbols of this brotherhood or
solidarity of our race. The chart of converging lines
of ancestors in Israel carried men's minds back from
the separate families to their common ancestor; again,
the ancestry of ancestors led back to a still earlier
common origin, and the process continued till all the
lines met in Noah. Each stage of the process enlarged
the range of every man's kinship, and broadened
the natural area of mutual help and affection. It is
true that the Jews failed to learn this larger lesson
from their genealogies, but within their own community
they felt intensely the bond of kinship and
brotherhood. Modern patriotism reproduces the strong
Jewish national feeling, and our humanitarianism is
beginning to extend it to the whole world. By this
time the facts of heredity have been more carefully
studied and are better understood. If we drew up
typical genealogies now, they would more fully and
accurately represent the mutual relationships of our
people. As far as they go, the chronicler's genealogies
form a clear and instructive diagram of the mutual
dependence of man on man and family on family.
The value of the diagram does not require the accuracy
of the actual names any more than the validity
of Euclid requires the actual existence of triangles
called A B C, D E F. These genealogies are in any
case a true symbol of the facts of family relations;
but they are drawn, so to speak, in one dimension only,
backwards and forwards in time. Yet the real family
life exists in three dimensions. There are numerous
cross-relations, cousinship of all degrees, as well as
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
sonship and brotherhood. A man has not merely his
male ancestors in the directly ascending line&mdash;father,
grandfather, great-grandfather, etc.&mdash;but he has female
ancestors as well. By going back three or four
generations a man is connected with an immense
number of cousins; and if the complete network of ten
or fifteen generations could be worked out, it would
probably show some blood bond throughout a whole
nation. Thus the ancestral roots of a man's life
and character have wide ramifications in the former
generations of his people. The further we go back
the larger is the element of ancestry common to the
different individuals of the same community. The
chronicler's genealogies only show us individuals as
links in a set of chains. The more complete genealogical
scheme would be better illustrated by the
ganglia of the nervous system, each of which is connected
by numerous nerve fibres with the other ganglia.
The Church has been compared to the body, <q>which is
one, and hath many members, and all the members
of the body, being many, are one body.</q> Humanity,
by its natural kinship, is also such a body; the nation
is still more truly <q>one body.</q> Patriotism and humanity
are instincts as natural and as binding as those of the
family; and the genealogies express or symbolise the
wider family ties, that they may commend the virtues
and enforce the duties that arise out of these ties.
</p>

<p>
Before closing this chapter something may be said
on one or two special points. Women are virtually
ignored in these genealogies, a fact that rather indicates
a failure to recognise their influence than the absence
of such influence. Here and there a woman is mentioned
for some special reason. For instance, the
names of Zeruiah and Abigail are inserted in order to
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
show that Joab, Abishai, and Asahel, together with
Amasa, were all cousins of David. The same keen
interest in David leads the chronicler to record the
names of his wives. It is noteworthy that of the four
women who are mentioned in St. Matthew's genealogy
of our Lord only two&mdash;Tamar and Bath-shua (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Bath-sheba)&mdash;are
mentioned here. Probably St. Matthew
was careful to complete the list because Rahab and
Ruth, like Tamar and possibly Bath-sheba, were
foreigners, and their names in the genealogy indicated
a connection between Christ and the Gentiles, and
served to emphasise His mission to be the Saviour of
the world.
</p>

<p>
Again, much caution is necessary in applying any
principle of heredity. A genealogy, as we have seen,
suggests our dependence in many ways upon our
ancestry. But a man's relations to his kindred are
many and complicated; a quality, for instance, may be
latent for one or more generations and then reappear,
so that to all appearance a man inherits from his
grandfather or from a more remote ancestor rather than
from his father or mother. Conversely the presence
of certain traits of character in a child does not show
that any corresponding tendency has necessarily been
active in the life of either parent. Neither must the
influence of circumstances be confounded with that of
heredity. Moreover, very large allowance must be
made for our ignorance of the laws that govern the
human will, an ignorance that will often baffle our
attempts to find in heredity any simple explanation
of men's characters and actions. Thomas Fuller has
a quaint <q>Scripture observation</q> that gives an important
practical application of these principles:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Lord, I find the genealogy of my Saviour strangely
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
chequered with four remarkable changes in four
immediate generations:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>1. <q>Rehoboam begat Abiam</q>; that is, a bad father
begat a bad son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>2. <q>Abiam begat Asa</q>; that is, a bad father a good
son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>3. <q>Asa begat Jehosaphat</q>; that is, a good father
a good son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>4. <q>Jehosaphat begat Joram</q>; that is, a good father
a bad son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I see, Lord, from hence that my father's piety cannot
be entailed; that is bad news for me. But I see also
that actual impiety is not always hereditary; that is
good news for my son.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Statistics.</head>

<p>
Statistics play an important part in Chronicles
and in the Old Testament generally. To begin
with, there are the genealogies and other lists of names,
such as the lists of David's counsellors and the roll
of honour of his mighty men. The chronicler specially
delights in lists of names, and most of all in lists of
Levitical choristers. He gives us lists of the orchestras
and choirs who performed when the Ark was brought
to Zion<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xv.</note> and at Hezekiah's passover,<note place='foot'>Cf. 2 Chron. xxix. 12 and xxx. 22.</note> also a list of
Levites whom Jehoshaphat sent out to teach in Judah.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xvii. 8.</note>
No doubt family pride was gratified when the chronicler's
contemporaries and friends read the names of
their ancestors in connection with great events in the
history of their religion. Possibly they supplied him
with the information from which these lists were
compiled. An incidental result of the celibacy of the
Romanist clergy has been to render ancient ecclesiastical
genealogies impossible; modern clergymen cannot
trace their descent to the monks who landed with
Augustine. Our genealogies might enable a historian
to construct lists of the combatants at Agincourt and
Hastings; but the Crusades are the only wars of the
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
Church militant for which modern pedigrees could
furnish a muster-roll.
</p>

<p>
We find also in the Old Testament the specifications
and subscription-lists for the Tabernacle and for
Solomon's temple.<note place='foot'>Exod. xxv-xxxix.; 1 Kings vi.; 1 Chron. xxix.; 2 Chron. iii., v.</note> These statistics, however, are not
furnished for the second Temple, probably for the same
reason that in modern subscription-lists the donors
of shillings and half-crowns are to be indicated by
initials, or described as <q>friends</q> and <q>sympathisers,</q>
or massed together under the heading <q>smaller sums.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Old Testament is also rich in census returns
and statements as to the numbers of armies and of
the divisions of which they were composed. There
are the returns of the census taken twice in the
wilderness and accounts of the numbers of the different
families who came from Babylon with Zerubbabel
and later on with Ezra; there is a census of the
Levites in David's time according to their several
families<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xv. 4-10.</note>; there are the numbers of the tribal contingents
that came to Hebron to make David king,<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xii. 23-37.</note>
and much similar information.
</p>

<p>
Statistics therefore occupy a conspicuous position
in the inspired record of Divine revelation, and yet we
often hesitate to connect such terms as <q>inspiration</q> and
<q>revelation</q> with numbers, and names, and details of
civil and ecclesiastical organisation. We are afraid
lest any stress laid on purely accidental details should
distract men's attention from the eternal essence of
the Gospel, lest any suggestion that the certainty of
Christian truth is dependent on the accuracy of these
statistics should become a stumbling-block and destroy
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
the faith of some. Concerning such matters there
have been many foolish questions of genealogies, profane
and vain babblings, which have increased unto
more ungodliness. Quite apart from these, even in
the Old Testament a sanctity attaches to the number
seven, but there is no warrant for any considerable expenditure
of time and thought upon mystical arithmetic.
A symbolism runs through the details of the building,
furniture, and ritual alike of the Tabernacle and
the Temple, and this symbolism possesses a legitimate
religious significance; but its exposition is not specially
suggested by the book of Chronicles. The exposition
of such symbolism is not always sufficiently governed
by a sense of proportion. Ingenuity in supplying
subtle interpretations of minute details often conceals
the great truths which the symbols are really intended
to enforce. Moreover, the sacred writers did not give
statistics merely to furnish materials for Cabbala and
Gematria or even to serve as theological types and
symbols. Sometimes their purpose was more simple
and practical. If we knew all the history of the
Tabernacle and Temple subscription-lists, we should
doubtless find that they had been used to stimulate
generous gifts towards the erection of the second
Temple. Preachers for building funds can find abundance
of suitable texts in Exodus, Kings, and Chronicles.
</p>

<p>
But Biblical statistics are also examples in accuracy
and thoroughness of information, and recognitions of
the more obscure and prosaic manifestations of the
higher life. Indeed, in these and other ways the Bible
gives an anticipatory sanction to the exact sciences.
</p>

<p>
The mention of accuracy in connection with Chronicles
may be received by some readers with a contemptuous
smile. But we are indebted to the chronicler for exact
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
and full information about the Jews who returned from
Babylon; and in spite of the extremely severe judgment
passed upon Chronicles by many critics, we may
still venture to believe that the chronicler's statistics
are as accurate as his knowledge and critical training
rendered possible. He may sometimes give figures
obtained by calculation from uncertain data, but such a
practice is quite consistent with honesty and a desire
to supply the best available information. Modern
scholars are quite ready to present us with figures
as to the membership of the Christian Church under
Antoninus Pius or Constantine; and some of these
figures are not much more probable than the most
doubtful in Chronicles. All that is necessary to make
the chronicler's statistics an example to us is that they
should be the monument of a conscientious attempt to
tell the truth, and this they undoubtedly are.
</p>

<p>
This Biblical example is the more useful because
statistics are often evil spoken of, and they have no
outward attractiveness to shield them from popular
prejudice. We are told that <q>nothing is so false as
statistics,</q> and that <q>figures will prove anything</q>; and
the polemic is sustained by works like <hi rend='italic'>Hard Times</hi>
and the awful example of Mr. Gradgrind. Properly
understood, these proverbs illustrate the very general
impatience of any demand for exact thought and expression.
If <q>figures</q> will prove anything, so will texts.
</p>

<p>
Though this popular prejudice cannot be altogether
ignored, yet it need not be taken too seriously. The
opposite principle, when stated, will at once be seen to
be a truism. For it amounts to this: exact and comprehensive
knowledge is the basis of a right understanding
of history, and is a necessary condition of
right action. This principle is often neglected because
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
it is obvious. Yet, to illustrate it from our author, a
knowledge of the size and plan of the Temple greatly
adds to the vividness of our pictures of Hebrew religion.
We apprehend later Jewish life much more clearly
with the aid of the statistics as to the numbers, families,
and settlements of the returning exiles; and similarly
the account-books of the bailiff of an English estate
in the fourteenth century are worth several hundred
pages of contemporary theology. These considerations
may encourage those who perform the thankless task of
compiling the statistics, subscription-lists, and balance-sheets
of missionary and philanthropic societies. The
zealous and intelligent historian of Christian life and
service will need these dry records to enable him to
understand his subject, and the highest literary gifts
may be employed in the eloquent exposition of these
apparently uninteresting facts and figures. Moreover,
upon the accuracy of these records depends the possibility
of determining a true course for the future.
Neither societies nor individuals, for instance, can
afford to live beyond their income without knowing it.
</p>

<p>
Statistics, too, are the only form in which many acts
of service can be recognised and recorded. Literature
can only deal with typical instances, and naturally it
selects the more dramatic. The missionary report can
only tell the story of a few striking conversions; it
may give the history of the exceptional self-denial
involved in one or two of its subscriptions; for the
rest we must be content with tables and subscription-lists.
But these dry statistics represent an infinitude
of patience and self-denial, of work and prayer, of
Divine grace and blessing. The city missionary may
narrate his experiences with a few inquirers and
penitents, but the great bulk of his work can only be
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
recorded in the statement of visits paid and services
conducted. We are tempted sometimes to disparage
these statements, to ask how many of the visits and
services had any result; we are impatient sometimes
because Christian work is estimated by any such
numerical line and measure. No doubt the method has
many defects, and must not be used too mechanically;
but we cannot give it up without ignoring altogether
much earnest and successful labour.
</p>

<p>
Our chronicler's interest in statistics lays healthy
emphasis on the practical character of religion. There
is a danger of identifying spiritual force with literary
and rhetorical gifts; to recognise the religious value
of statistics is the most forcible protest against such
identification. The permanent contribution of any age
to religious thought will naturally take a literary form,
and the higher the literary qualities of religious writing,
the more likely it is to survive. Shakespeare, Milton,
and Bunyan have probably exercised a more powerful
direct religious influence on subsequent generations
than all the theologians of the seventeenth century.
But the supreme service of the Church in any age is
its influence on its own generation, by which it moulds
the generation immediately following. That influence
can only be estimated by a careful study of all possible
information, and especially of statistics. We cannot
assign mathematical values to spiritual effects and
tabulate them like Board of Trade returns; but real
spiritual movements will before long have practical
issues, that can be heard, and seen, and felt, and even
admit of being put into tables. <q>The wind bloweth
where it listeth, and thou hearest the voice thereof, but
knowest not whence it cometh and whither it goeth</q><note place='foot'>John iii. 8.</note>;
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
and yet the boughs and the corn bend before the wind,
and the ships are carried across the sea to their desired
haven. Tables may be drawn up of the tonnage and
the rate of sailing. So is every one that is born of the
Spirit. You cannot tell when and how God breathes
upon the soul; but if the Divine Spirit be indeed at
work in any society, there will be fewer crimes and
quarrels, less scandal, and more deeds of charity. We
may justly suspect a revival which has no effect upon
the statistical records of national life. Subscription-lists
are very imperfect tests of enthusiasm, but any widespread
Christian fervour would be worth little if it did
not swell subscription-lists.
</p>

<p>
Chronicles is not the most important witness to a
sympathetic relationship between the Bible and exact
science. The first chapter of Genesis is the classic
example of the appropriation by an inspired writer of
the scientific spirit and method. Some chapters in Job
show a distinctly scientific interest in natural phenomena.
Moreover, the direct concern of Chronicles is in the
religious aspects of social science. And yet there is a
patient accumulation of data with no obvious dramatic
value: names, dates, numbers, specifications, and ritual
which do not improve the literary character of the
narrative. This conscientious recording of dry facts,
this noting down of anything and everything that
connects with the subject, is closely akin to the initial
processes of the inductive sciences. True, the
chronicler's interests are in some directions narrowed
by personal and professional feeling; but within these
limits he is anxious to make a complete record, which,
as we have seen, sometimes leads to repetition. Now
inductive science is based on unlimited statistics. The
astronomer and biologist share the chronicler's appetite
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
for this kind of mental food. The lists in Chronicles
are few and meagre compared to the records of
Greenwich Observatory or the volumes which contain
the data of biology or sociology; but the chronicler
becomes in a certain sense the forerunner of Darwin,
Spencer, and Galton. The differences are indeed
immense. The interval of two thousand odd years
between the ancient annalist and the modern scientists
has not been thrown away. In estimating the value of
evidence and interpreting its significance, the chronicler
was a mere child compared with his modern successors.
His aims and interests were entirely different from
theirs. But yet he was moved by a spirit which they
may be said to inherit. His careful collection of facts,
even his tendency to read the ideas and institutions of
his own time into ancient history, are indications of a
reverence for the past and of an anxiety to base ideas
and action upon a knowledge of that past. This
foreshadows the reverence of modern science for experience,
its anxiety to base its laws and theories
upon observation of what has actually occurred. The
principle that the past determines and interprets the
present and the future lies at the root of the theological
attitude of the most conservative minds and the
scientific work of the most advanced thinkers. The
conservative spirit, like the chronicler, is apt to suffer its
inherited prepossessions and personal interests to
hinder a true observation and understanding of the
past. But the chronicler's opportunities and experience
were narrow indeed compared with those of theological
students to-day; and we have every right to lay stress
on the progress which he had achieved and the onward
path that it indicated rather than on the yet more
advanced stages which still lay beyond his horizon.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chapter_IV'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Family Traditions. 1 Chron. i. 10, 19, 46; ii. 3, 7, 34; iv. 9, 10, 18, 22, 27, 34-43;
v. 10, 18-22; vii. 21-23; viii. 13.</head>

<p>
Chronicles is a miniature Old Testament, and
may have been meant as a handbook for
ordinary people, who had no access to the whole
library of sacred writings. It contains nothing corresponding
to the books of Wisdom or the apocalyptic
literature; but all the other types of Old Testament
literature are represented. There are genealogies,
statistics, ritual, history, psalms, and prophecies. The
interest shown by Chronicles in family traditions harmonises
with the stress laid by the Hebrew Scriptures
upon family life. The other historical books are largely
occupied with the family history of the Patriarchs, of
Moses, of Jephthah, Gideon, Samson, Saul, and David.
The chronicler intersperses his genealogies with short
anecdotes about the different families and tribes. Some
of these are borrowed from the older books; but others
are peculiar to our author, and were doubtless obtained
by him from the family records and traditions of his
contemporaries. The statements that <q>Nimrod began
to be mighty upon the earth</q><note place='foot'>i. 10.</note>; that <q>the name of one</q>
of Eber's sons <q>was Peleg, because in his days the
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
earth was divided</q><note place='foot'>i. 19.</note>; and that Hadad <q>smote Moab in
the field of Midian,</q><note place='foot'>i. 46.</note> are borrowed from Genesis. As
he omits events much more important and more closely
connected with the history of Israel, and gives no
account of Babel, or of Abraham, or of the conquest of
Canaan, these little notes are probably retained by
accident, because at times the chronicler copied his
authorities somewhat mechanically. It was less trouble
to take the genealogies as they stood than to exercise
great care in weeding out everything but the bare
names.
</p>

<p>
In one instance,<note place='foot'>Cf. Gen. xxxvi. 24 and 1 Chron. i. 40.</note> however, the chronicler has erased
a curious note to a genealogy in Genesis. A certain
Anah is mentioned both in Genesis and Chronicles
among the Horites, who inhabited Mount Seir before
it was conquered by Edom. Most of us, in reading the
Authorised Version, have wondered what historical or
religious interest secured a permanent record for the
fact that <q>Anah found the mules in the wilderness,
as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.</q> A possible
solution seemed to be that this note was preserved as
the earliest reference to the existence of mules, which
animals played an important part in the social life of
Palestine; but the Revised Version sets aside this
explanation by substituting <q>hot springs</q> for <q>mules,</q>
as these hot springs are only mentioned here, the
passage becomes a greater puzzle than ever. The
chronicler could hardly overlook this curious piece of
information, but he naturally felt that this obscure
archæological note about the aboriginal Horites did
not fall within the scope of his work. On the other
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
hand, the tragic fates of Er and Achar<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Achan (ii. 3, 7).</note> had a direct
genealogical significance. They are referred to in
order to explain why the lists contain no descendants
of these members of the tribe of Judah. The notes to
these names illustrate the more depressing aspects of
history. The men who lived happy, honourable lives
can be mentioned one after another without any comment;
but even the compiler of pedigrees pauses to
note the crimes and misfortunes that broke the natural
order of life. The annals of old families dwell with
melancholy pride on murders, and fatal duels, and
suicides. History, like an ancient mansion, is haunted
with unhappy ghosts. Yet our interest in tragedy is
a testimony to the blessedness of life; comfort and
enjoyment are too monotonously common to be worth
recording, but we are attracted and excited by exceptional
instances of suffering and sin.
</p>

<p>
Let us turn to the episodes of family life only found
in Chronicles. They may mostly be arranged in little
groups of two or three, and some of the groups present
us with an interesting contrast.
</p>

<p>
We learn from ii. 34-41 and iv. 18 that two Jewish
families traced their descent from Egyptian ancestors.
Sheshan, according to Chronicles, was eighth in
descent from Judah and fifth from Jerahmeel, the
brother of Caleb. Having daughters but no son, he
gave one of his daughters in marriage to an Egyptian
slave named Jarha. The descendants of this union are
traced for thirteen generations. Genealogies, however,
are not always complete; and our other data do not
suffice to determine even approximately the date of
this marriage. But the five generations between
Jerahmeel and Sheshan indicate a period long after the
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
Exodus; and as Egypt plays no recorded part in the
history of Israel between the Exodus and the reign of
Solomon, the marriage may have taken place under
the monarchy. The story is a curious parallel to that
of Joseph, with the parts of Israelite and Egyptian
reversed. God is no respecter of persons; it is not
only when the desolate and afflicted in strange lands
belong to the chosen people that Jehovah relieves
and delivers them. It is true of the Egyptian, as well
as of the Israelite, that <q>the Lord maketh poor and
maketh rich.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>He bringeth low, He also lifteth up;</q></l>
<l>He raiseth up the poor out of the dust:</l>
<l>He lifteth up the needy from the dunghill,</l>
<l>To make them sit with princes</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And inherit the throne of glory.</q><note place='foot'>1 Sam. ii. 7, 8.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This song might have been sung at Jarha's wedding
as well as at Joseph's.
</p>

<p>
Both these marriages throw a sidelight upon the
character of Eastern slavery. They show how sharply
and deeply it was divided from the hopeless degradation
of negro slavery in America. Israelites did not
recognise distinctions of race and colour between themselves
and their bondsmen so as to treat them as
worse than pariahs and regard them with physical
loathing. An American considers himself disgraced by
a slight taint of negro blood in his ancestry, but a noble
Jewish family was proud to trace its descent from an
Egyptian slave.
</p>

<p>
The other story is somewhat different, and rests
upon an obscure and corrupt passage in iv. 18. The
confusion makes it impossible to arrive at any date,
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
even by rough approximation. The genealogical relations
of the actors are by no means certain, but
some interesting points are tolerably clear. Some time
after the conquest of Canaan, a descendant of Caleb
married two wives, one a Jewess, the other an
Egyptian. The Egyptian was Bithiah, a daughter of
Pharaoh, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, of the contemporary king of Egypt. It
appears probable that the inhabitants of Eshtemoa
traced their descent to this Egyptian princess, while
those of Gedor, Soco, and Zanoah claimed Mered as
their ancestor by his Jewish wife.<note place='foot'>Vv. 17, 18, as they stand, do not make sense. The second
sentence of ver. 18 should be read before <q>and she bare Miriam</q> in
ver. 17. Mered and Bithiah formed a tempting subject for the rabbis,
and gave occasion for some of their usual grotesque fancies. Mered
has been identified by them both with Caleb and Moses.</note> Here again we
have the bare outline of a romance, which the imagination
is at liberty to fill in. It has been suggested that
Bithiah may have been the victim of some Jewish raid
into Egypt, but surely a king of Egypt would have
either ransomed his daughter or recovered her by force
of arms. The story rather suggests that the chiefs
of the clans of Judah were semi-independent and
possessed of considerable wealth and power, so that
the royal family of Egypt could intermarry with them,
as with reigning sovereigns. But if so, the pride of
Egypt must have been greatly broken since the time
when the Pharaohs haughtily refused to give their
daughters in marriage to the kings of Babylon.
</p>

<p>
Both Egyptian alliances occur among the Kenizzites,
the descendants of the brothers Caleb and Jerahmeel.
In one case a Jewess marries an Egyptian slave; in the
other a Jew marries an Egyptian princess. Doubtless
these marriages did not stand alone, and there were
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
others with foreigners of varying social rank. The
stories show that even after the Captivity the tradition
survived that the clans in the south of Judah had been
closely connected with Egypt, and that Solomon was
not the only member of the tribe who had taken an
Egyptian wife. Now intermarriage with foreigners is
partly forbidden by the Pentateuch; and the prohibition
was extended and sternly enforced by Ezra and Nehemiah.<note place='foot'>Deut. vii. 3; Josh. xxiii. 12; Ezra ix. 1, x.; Neh. xiii. 23.</note>
In the time of the chronicler there was a growing
feeling against such marriages. Hence the traditions we
are discussing cannot have originated after the Return,
but must be at any rate earlier than the publication of
Deuteronomy under Josiah.
</p>

<p>
Such marriages with Egyptians must have had some
influence on the religion of the south of Judah, but
probably the foreigners usually followed the example of
Ruth, and adopted the faith of the families into which
they came. When they said, <q>Thy people shall be my
people,</q> they did not fail to add, <q>and thy God shall
be my God.</q> When the Egyptian princess married
the head of a Jewish clan, she became one of Jehovah's
people; and her adoption into the family of the God of
Israel was symbolised by a new name: <q>Bithiah,</q>
<q>daughter of Jehovah.</q> Whether later Judaism owed
anything to Egyptian influences can only be matter
of conjecture; at any rate, they did not pervert the
southern clans from their old faith. The Calebites and
Jerahmeelites were the backbone of Judah both before
and after the Captivity.
</p>

<p>
The remaining traditions relate to the warfare of the
Israelites with their neighbours. The first is a colourless
reminiscence, that might have been recorded of
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
the effectual prayer of any pious Israelite. The
genealogies of chap. iv. are interrupted by a paragraph
entirely unconnected with the context. The subject of
this fragment is a certain Jabez never mentioned elsewhere,
and, so far as any record goes, as entirely
<q>without father, without mother, without genealogy,</q>
as Melchizedek himself. As chap. iv. deals with the
families of Judah, and in ii. 55 there is a town Jabez
also belonging to Judah, we may suppose that the
chronicler had reasons for assigning Jabez to that
tribe; but he has neither given these reasons, nor
indicated how Jabez was connected therewith. The
paragraph runs as follows<note place='foot'>iv. 9, 10.</note>: <q>And Jabez was honoured
above his brethren, and his mother called his name
Jabez</q> (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ya'bēç</foreign>), <q>saying, In pain</q> (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>'ōçeb</foreign>) <q rend='pre'>I bore him.
And Jabez called upon the God of Israel, saying,&mdash;</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'>If Thou wilt indeed bless me</q></q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>By enlarging my possessions,</l>
<l>And Thy hand be with me</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='none'><q rend='post'>To provide pasture,<note place='foot'>The reading on which this translation is based is obtained by an
alteration of the vowels of the Masoretic text; cf. Bertheau, i. 1.</note> that I be not in distress</q></q> (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>'ōçeb</foreign>).</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q rend='post'>And God brought about what he asked.</q> The
chronicler has evidently inserted here a broken and
disconnected fragment from one of his sources; and we
are puzzled to understand why he gives so much,
and no more. Surely not merely to introduce the
etymologies of Jabez; or if Jabez were so important
that it was worth while to interrupt the genealogies to
furnish two derivations of his name, why are we not
told more about him? Who was he, when and where
did he live, and at whose expense were his possessions
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
enlarged and pasture provided for him? Everything
that could give colour and interest to the narrative is
withheld, and we are merely told that he prayed for
earthly blessing and obtained it. The spiritual lesson
is obvious, but it is very frequently enforced and
illustrated in the Old Testament. Why should this
episode about an utterly unknown man be thrust by
main force into an unsuitable context, if it is only one
example of a most familiar truth? It has been pointed
out that Jacob vowed a similar vow and built an altar
to El, the God of Israel<note place='foot'>Gen. xxviii. 20; xxxiii. 20.</note>; but this is one of many
coincidences. The paragraph certainly tells us something
about the chronicler's views on prayer, but
nothing that is not more forcibly stated and exemplified
in many other passages; it is mainly interesting to us
because of the light it throws on his methods of composition.
Elsewhere he embodies portions of well-known
works and apparently assumes that his readers
are sufficiently versed in them to be able to understand
the point of his extracts. Probably Jabez was so
familiar to the chronicler's immediate circle that he can
take for granted that a few lines will suffice to recall
all the circumstances to a reader.
</p>

<p>
We have next a series of much more definite
statements about Israelite prowess and success in wars
against Moab and other enemies.
</p>

<p>
In iv. 21, 22, we read, <q>The sons of Shelah the son
of Judah: Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the
father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of
them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea;
and Jokim, and the men of Cozeba, and Joash, and
Saraph, who had dominion in Moab and returned to
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
Bethlehem.</q><note place='foot'>This translation is obtained by slightly altering the Masoretic
text.</note> Here again the information is too vague
to enable us to fix any date, nor is it quite certain who
had dominion in Moab. The verb <q>had dominion</q>
is plural in Hebrew, and may refer to all or any of the
sons of Shelah. But, in spite of uncertainties, it is
interesting to find chiefs or clans of Judah ruling in
Moab. Possibly this immigration took place when
David conquered and partly depopulated the country.
The men of Judah may have returned to Bethlehem
when Moab passed to the northern kingdom at the
disruption, or when Moab regained its independence.
</p>

<p>
The incident in iv. 34-43 differs from the preceding
in having a definite date assigned to it. In the time of
Hezekiah some Simeonite clans had largely increased
in number and found themselves straitened for room
for their flocks. They accordingly went in search of
new pasturage. One company went to Gedor, another
to Mount Seir.
</p>

<p>
The situation of Gedor is not clearly known. It cannot
be the Gedor of Josh. xv. 58, which lay in the
heart of Judah. The LXX. has Gerar, a town to the
south of Gaza, and this may be the right reading; but
whether we read Gedor or Gerar, the scene of the
invasion will be in the country south of Judah. Here
the children of Simeon found what they wanted, <q>fat
pasture, and good,</q> and abundant, for <q>the land was
wide.</q> There was the additional advantage that the
inhabitants were harmless and inoffensive and fell an
easy prey to their invaders: <q>The land was quiet and
peaceable, for they that dwelt there aforetime were of
Ham.</q> As Ham in the genealogies is the father of
Cainan, these peaceable folk would be Cainanites; and
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
among them were a people called Meunim, probably
not connected with any of the Maons mentioned in
the Old Testament, but with some other town or district
of the same name. So <q>these written by name
came in the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, and
smote their tents, and the Meunim that were found
there, and devoted them to destruction as accursed,
so that none are left unto this day. And the Simeonites
dwelt in their stead.</q><note place='foot'>iv. 41; cf. R.V.</note>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Then follows in the simplest and most unconscious
way the only justification that is offered for the behaviour
of the invaders: <q>because there was pasture
there for their flocks.</q> The narrative takes for
granted&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The good old rule, the simple plan,</q></l>
<l>That they should take who have the power,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And they should keep who can.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The expedition to Mount Seir appears to have been
a sequel to the attack on Gedor. Five hundred of the
victors emigrated into Edom, and smote the remnant
of the Amalekites who had survived the massacre
under Saul<note place='foot'>1 Sam. xv.</note>; <q>and they also dwelt there unto this
day.</q>
</p>

<p>
In substance, style, and ideas this passage closely
resembles the books of Joshua and Judges, where the
phrase <q>unto this day</q> frequently occurs. Here, of
course, the <q>day</q> in question is the time of the
chronicler's authority. When Chronicles was written
the Simeonites in Gedor and Mount Seir had long ago
shared the fate of their victims.
</p>

<p>
The conquest of Gedor reminds us how in the early
days of the Israelite occupation of Palestine <q>Judah
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
went with Simeon his brother into the same southern
lands,</q> and they smote the Canaanites that inhabited
Zephath, and devoted them to destruction as accursed<note place='foot'>Judges i. 17.</note>;
and how the house of Joseph took Bethel by treachery.<note place='foot'>Judges i. 22-26.</note>
But the closest parallel is the Danite conquest of
Laish.<note place='foot'>Judges xviii.</note> The Danite spies said that the people of Laish
<q>dwelt in security, after the manner of the Zidonians,
quiet and secure,</q> harmless and inoffensive, like the
Gedorites. Nor were they likely to receive succour
from the powerful city of Zidon or from other allies,
for <q>they were far from the Zidonians, and had no
dealings with any man.</q> Accordingly, having observed
the prosperous but defenceless position of this peaceable
people, they returned and reported to their brethren,
<q>Arise, and let us go up against them, for we have
seen the land, and, behold, it is very good; and are ye
still? Be not slothful to go and to enter in to possess
the land. When ye go, ye shall come unto a people
secure, and the land,</q> like that of Gedor, <q>is large,
for God hath given it into your hand, a place where
there is no want of anything that is in the earth.</q>
</p>

<p>
The moral of these incidents is obvious. When
a prosperous people is peaceable and defenceless, it
is a clear sign that God has delivered them into the
hand of any warlike and enterprising nation that
knows how to use its opportunities. The chronicler,
however, is not responsible for this morality, but he
does not feel compelled to make any protest against
the ethical views of his source. There is a refreshing
frankness about these ancient narratives. The wolf
devours the lamb without inventing any flimsy pretext
about troubled waters.
</p>

<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>

<p>
But in criticising these Hebrew clans who lived in
the dawn of history and religion we condemn ourselves.
If we make adequate allowance for the influence of
Christ, and the New Testament, and centuries of Christian
teaching, Simeon and Dan do not compare
unfavourably with modern nations. As we review the
wars of Christendom, we shall often be puzzled to find
any ground for the outbreak of hostilities other than
the defencelessness of the weaker combatant. The
Spanish conquest of America and the English conquest
of India afford examples of the treatment of weaker
races which fairly rank with those of the Old Testament.
Even to-day the independence of the smaller European
states is mainly guaranteed by the jealousies of the
Great Powers. Still there has been progress in international
morality; we have got at last to the stage
of Æsop's fable. Public opinion condemns wanton
aggression against a weak state; and the stronger
power employs the resources of civilised diplomacy in
showing that not only the absent, but also the helpless,
are always wrong. There has also been a substantial
advance in humanity towards conquered peoples.
Christian warfare even since the Middle Ages has been
stained with the horrors of the Thirty Years' War and
many other barbarities; the treatment of the American
Indians by settlers has often been cruel and unjust;
but no civilised nation would now systematically
massacre men, women, and children in cold blood.
We are thankful for any progress towards better things,
but we cannot feel that men have yet realised that
Christ has a message for nations as well as for individuals.
As His disciples we can only pray more earnestly
that the kingdoms of the earth may in deed and truth
become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ.
</p>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<p>
The next incident is more honourable to the Israelites.
<q>The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe
of Manasseh</q> did not merely surprise and slaughter
quiet and peaceable people: they conquered formidable
enemies in fair fight.<note place='foot'>Vv. 7-10, 18-22.</note> There are two separate accounts
of a war with the Hagrites, one appended to the
genealogy of Reuben and one to that of Gad. The
former is very brief and general, comprising nothing
but a bare statement that there was a successful war
and a consequent appropriation of territory. Probably
the two paragraphs are different forms of the same
narrative, derived by the chronicler from independent
sources. We may therefore confine our attention to
the more detailed account.
</p>

<p>
Here, as elsewhere, these Transjordanic tribes are
spoken of as <q>valiant<note place='foot'>Deut. xxxiii. 20; 1 Chron. xii. 8, 21.</note> men,</q> <q>men able to bear buckler
and sword and to shoot with the bow, and skilful in
war.</q> Their numbers were considerable. While five
hundred Simeonites were enough to destroy the
Amalekites on Mount Seir, these eastern tribes mustered
<q>forty and four thousand seven hundred and threescore
that were able to go forth to war.</q> Their enemies were
not <q>quiet and peaceable people,</q> but the wild Bedouin
of the desert, <q>the Hagrites, with Jetur and Naphish
and Nodab.</q> Nodab is mentioned only here; Jetur
and Naphish occur together in the lists of the sons of
Ishmael.<note place='foot'>Gen. xxv. 15.</note> Ituræa probably derived its name from the
tribe of Jetur. The Hagrites or Hagarenes were Arabs
closely connected with the Ishmaelites, and they seem
to have taken their name from Hagar. In Psalm
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
lxxxiii. 6-8 we find a similar confederacy on a larger
scale:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites,</q></l>
<l>Moab and the Hagarenes</l>
<l>Gebal and Ammon and Amalek,</l>
<l>Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre,</l>
<l>Assyria also is joined with them;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>They have holpen the children of Lot.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There could be no question of unprovoked aggression
against these children of Ishmael, that <q>wild ass
of a man, whose hand was against every man, and
every man's hand against him.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xvi. 12.</note> The narrative implies
that the Israelites were the aggressors, but to attack
the robber tribes of the desert would be as much an
act of self-defence as to destroy a hornet's nest. We
may be quite sure that when Reuben and Gad marched
eastward they had heavy losses to retrieve and bitter
wrongs to avenge. We might find a parallel in the
campaigns by which robber tribes are punished for
their raids within our Indian frontier, only we must
remember that Reuben and Gad were not very much
more law-abiding or unselfish than their Arab neighbours.
They were not engaged in maintaining a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pax
Britannica</foreign> for the benefit of subject nations; they
were carrying on a struggle for existence with persistent
and relentless foes. Another partial parallel would
be the border feuds on the Northumbrian marches,
when&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>... over border, dale, and fell</q></l>
<l>Full wide and far was terror spread;</l>
<l>For pathless marsh and mountain cell</l>
<l>The peasant left his lowly shed:</l>
<l>The frightened flocks and herds were pent</l>
<l>Beneath the peel's rude battlement,</l>
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
<l>And maids and matrons dropped the tear</l>
<l>While ready warriors seized the spear;</l>
<l>... the watchman's eye</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Dun wreaths of distant smoke can spy.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lay of the Last Minstrel</hi>, iv. 3.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But the Israelite expedition was on a larger scale
than any <q>warden raid,</q> and Eastern passions are
fiercer and shriller than those sung by the Last
Minstrel: the maids and matrons of the desert would
shriek and wail instead of <q>dropping a tear.</q>
</p>

<p>
In this great raid of ancient times <q>the war was of
God,</q> not, as at Laish, because God found for them
helpless and easy victims, but because He helped them
in a desperate struggle. When the fierce Israelite and
Arab borderers joined battle, the issue was at first
doubtful; and then <q>they cried to God, and He was
entreated of them, because they put their trust in Him,</q>
<q>and they were helped against</q> their enemies; <q>and
the Hagrites were delivered into their hand, and all that
were with them, and there fell many slain, because the
war was of God</q>; <q>and they took away their cattle:
of their camels fifty thousand, and of sheep two hundred
and fifty thousand, and of asses two thousand, and of
slaves a hundred thousand.</q> <q>And they dwelt in
their stead until the captivity.</q>
</p>

<p>
This <q>captivity</q> is the subject of another short
note. The chronicler apparently was anxious to distribute
his historical narratives equally among the
tribes. The genealogies of Reuben and Gad each conclude
with a notice of a war, and a similar account
follows that of Eastern Manasseh:&mdash;<q>And they trespassed
against the God of their fathers, and went
a-whoring after the gods of the peoples of the land,
whom God destroyed before them. And the God of
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul, king of Assyria, and
the spirit of Tilgath-pilneser, king of Assyria, and
he carried them away, even the Reubenites, and the
Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and brought
them unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the
river of Gozan, unto this day.</q><note place='foot'>Vv. 25, 26. Note the curious spelling <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Tilgath-pilneser</foreign> for the
more usual <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Tiglath-pileser</foreign>.</note> And this war also
was <q>of God.</q> Doubtless the descendants of the
surviving Hagrites and Ishmaelites were among the
allies of the Assyrian king, and saw in the ruin of
Eastern Israel a retribution for the sufferings of their
own people; but the later Jews and probably the
exiles in <q>Halah, Habor, and Hara,</q> and by <q>the
river of Gozan,</q> far away in North-eastern Mesopotamia,
found the cause of their sufferings in too great an
intimacy with their heathen neighbours: they had
gone a-whoring after their gods.
</p>

<p>
The last two incidents which we shall deal with in
this chapter serve to illustrate afresh the rough-and-ready
methods by which the chronicler has knotted
together threads of heterogeneous tradition into one
tangled skein. We shall see further how ready ancient
writers were to represent a tribe by the ancestor from
whom it traced its descent. We read in vii. 20, 21,
<q>The sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, and Bered his son,
and Tahath his son, and Eleadah his son, and Zabad
his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer and Elead,
whom the men of Gath that were born in the land
slew, because they came down to take away their cattle.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ezer and Elead are apparently brothers of the second
Shuthelah; at any rate, as six generations are mentioned
between them and Ephraim, they would seem
to have lived long after the Patriarch. Moreover, they
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
came down to Gath, so that they must have lived in
some hill-country not far off, presumably the hill-country
of Ephraim. But in the next two verses (22
and 23) we read, <q>And Ephraim their father mourned
many days, and his brethren came to comfort him.
And he went in to his wife, and she conceived, and bare
a son; and he called his name Beriah, because it went
evil with his house.</q>
</p>

<p>
Taking these words literally, Ezer and Elead were
the actual sons of Ephraim; and as Ephraim and his
family were born in Egypt and lived there all their days,
these patriarchal cattle-lifters did not come down from
any neighbouring highlands, but must have come up
from Egypt, all the way from the land of Goshen,
across the desert and past several Philistine and
Canaanite towns. This literal sense is simply impossible.
The author from whom the chronicler
borrowed this narrative is clearly using a natural and
beautiful figure to describe the distress in the tribe of
Ephraim when two of its clans were cut off, and the
fact that a new clan named <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Beriah</foreign> was formed to take
their place. Possibly we are not without information
as to how this new clan arose. In viii. 13 we read of
two Benjamites, <q><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Beriah</foreign> and Shema, who were heads
of fathers' houses of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who
put to flight the inhabitants of Gath.</q> Beriah and
Shema probably, coming to the aid of Ephraim, avenged
the defeat of Ezer and Elead; and in return received
the possessions of the clans, who had been cut off,
and Beriah was thus reckoned among the children of
Ephraim.<note place='foot'>Cf. Bertheau, i. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
The language of ver. 22 is very similar to that of
Gen. xxxvii. 34, 35: <q>And Jacob mourned for his son
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
many days. And all his sons and all his daughters
rose up to comfort him</q>; and the personification of
the tribe under the name of its ancestor may be
paralleled from Judges xxi. 6: <q>And the children of
Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother.</q>
</p>

<p>
Let us now reconstruct the story and consider its
significance. Two Ephraimite clans, Ezer and Elead,
set out to drive the cattle <q>of the men of Gath, who
were born in the land,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, of the aboriginal Avvites,
who had been dispossessed by the Philistines, but still
retained some of the pasture-lands. Falling into an
ambush or taken by surprise when encumbered with
their plunder, the Ephraimites were cut off, and nearly
all the fighting men of the clans perished. The Avvites,
reinforced by the Philistines of Gath, pressed their
advantage, and invaded the territory of Ephraim, whose
border districts, stripped of their defenders, lay at the
mercy of the conquerors. From this danger they were
rescued by the Benjamite clans Shema and Beriah,
then occupying Aijalon<note place='foot'>In Josh. xix. 42, xxi. 24, Aijalon is given to Dan; in Judges i. 34
it is given to Dan, but we are told that Amorites retained possession
of it, but became tributary to the house of Joseph; in 2 Chron.
xi. 10 it is given to <q>Judah and Benjamin.</q> As a frontier town, it
frequently changed hands.</note>; and the men of Gath in
their turn were defeated and driven back. The grateful
Ephraimites invited their allies to occupy the vacant
territory and in all probability to marry the widows
and daughters of their slaughtered kinsmen. From
that time onwards Beriah was reckoned as one of the
clans of Ephraim.
</p>

<p>
The account of this memorable cattle foray is a
necessary note to the genealogies to explain the
origin of an important clan and its double connection
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
with Ephraim and Benjamin. Both the chronicler and
his authority recorded it because of its genealogical
significance, not because they were anxious to perpetuate
the memory of the unfortunate raid. In the
ancient days to which the episode belonged, a frontier
cattle foray seemed as natural and meritorious an enterprise
as it did to William of Deloraine. The chronicler
does not think it necessary to signify any disapproval
it is by no means certain that he did disapprove&mdash;of such
spoiling of the uncircumcised; but the fact that he gives
the record without comment does not show that he
condoned cattle-stealing. Men to-day relate with pride
the lawless deeds of noble ancestors, but they would
be dismayed if their own sons proposed to adopt the
moral code of mediæval barons or Elizabethan
buccaneers.
</p>

<p>
In reviewing the scanty religious ideas involved in
this little group of family traditions, we have to
remember that they belong to a period of Israelite
history much older than that of the chronicler; in
estimating their value, we have to make large allowance
for the conventional ethics of the times. Religion not
only serves to raise the standard of morality, but also
to keep the average man up to the conventional
standard; it helps and encourages him to do what he
believes to be right as well as gives him a better understanding
of what right means. Primitive religion is
not to be disparaged because it did not at once convert
the rough Israelite clansmen into Havelocks and
Gordons. In those early days, courage, patriotism,
and loyalty to one's tribesmen were the most necessary
and approved virtues. They were fostered and stimulated
by the current belief in a God of battles, who
gave victory to His faithful people. Moreover, the
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
idea of Deity implied in these traditions, though inadequate,
is by no means unworthy. God is benevolent;
He enriches and succours His people; He answers
prayer, giving to Jabez the land and pasture for which
he asked. He is a righteous God; He responds to
and justifies His people's faith: <q>He was entreated of
the Reubenites and Gadites because they put their
trust in Him.</q> On the other hand, He is a jealous
God; He punishes Israel when they <q>trespass against
the God of their fathers and go a-whoring after the
gods of the peoples of the land.</q> But the feeling here
attributed to Jehovah is not merely one of personal
jealousy. Loyalty to Him meant a great deal more
than a preference for a god called Jehovah over a god
called Chemosh. It involved a special recognition of
morality and purity, and gave a religious sanction to
patriotism and the sentiment of national unity. Worship
of Moabite or Syrian gods weakened a man's
enthusiasm for Israel and his sense of fellowship with
his countrymen, just as allegiance to an Italian prince
and prelate has seemed to Protestants to deprive the
Romanist of his full inheritance in English life and
feeling. He who went astray after other gods did not
merely indulge his individual taste in doctrine and
ritual: he was a traitor to the social order, to the
prosperity and national union, of Israel. Such disloyalty
broke up the nation, and sent Israel and Judah
into captivity piecemeal.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Jewish Community In The Time Of The
Chronicler.</head>

<p>
We have already referred to the light thrown by
Chronicles on this subject. Besides the direct
information given in Ezra and Nehemiah, and sometimes
in Chronicles itself, the chronicler by describing
the past in terms of the present often unconsciously
helps us to reconstruct the picture of his own day.
We shall have to make occasional reference to the
books of Ezra and Nehemiah, but the age of the
chronicler is later than the events which they describe,
and we shall be traversing different ground from that
covered by the volume of the <q>Expositor's Bible</q> which
deals with them.
</p>

<p>
Chronicles is full of evidence that the civil and
ecclesiastical system of the Pentateuch had become
fully established long before the chronicler wrote. Its
gradual origin had been forgotten, and it was assumed
that the Law in its final and complete form had been
known and observed from the time of David onwards.
At every stage of the history Levites are introduced,
occupying the subordinate position and discharging
the menial duties assigned to them by the latest documents
of the Pentateuch. In other matters small and
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
great, especially those concerning the Temple and its
sanctity, the chronicler shows himself so familiar with
the Law that he could not imagine Israel without it.
Picture the life of Judah as we find it in 2 Kings and
the prophecies of the eighth century, put this picture
side by side with another of the Judaism of the New
Testament, and remember that Chronicles is about
a century nearer to the latter than to the former. It
is not difficult to trace the effect of this absorption in
the system of the Pentateuch. The community in and
about Jerusalem had become a Church, and was in
possession of a Bible. But the hardening, despiritualising
processes which created later Judaism were
already at work. A building, a system of ritual, and
a set of officials were coming to be regarded as the
essential elements of the Church. The Bible was
important partly because it dealt with these essential
elements, partly because it provided a series of regulations
about washings and meats, and thus enabled the
layman to exalt his everyday life into a round of ceremonial
observances. The habit of using the Pentateuch
chiefly as a handbook of external and technical ritual
seriously influenced the current interpretation of the
Bible. It naturally led to a hard literalism and a
disingenuous exegesis. This interest in externals is
patent enough in the chronicler, and the tendencies of
Biblical exegesis are illustrated by his use of Samuel
and Kings. On the other hand, we must allow for
great development of this process in the interval
between Chronicles and the New Testament. The
evils of later Judaism were yet far from mature, and
religious life and thought in Palestine were still much
more elastic than they became later on.
</p>

<p>
We have also to remember that at this period the
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
zealous observers of the Law can only have formed a
portion of the community, corresponding roughly to the
regular attendants at public worship in a Christian
country. Beyond and beneath the pious legalists were
<q>the people of the land,</q> those who were too careless
or too busy to attend to ceremonial; but for both
classes the popular and prominent ideal of religion was
made up of a magnificent building, a dignified and
wealthy clergy, and an elaborate ritual, alike for great
public functions and for the minutiæ of daily life.
</p>

<p>
Besides all these the Jewish community had its
sacred writings. As one of the ministers of the Temple,
and, moreover, both a student of the national literature
and himself an author, the chronicler represents the
best literary knowledge of contemporary Palestinian
Judaism; and his somewhat mechanical methods of
composition make it easy for us to discern his indebtedness
to older writers. We turn his pages with interest
to learn what books were known and read by the most
cultured Jews of his time. First and foremost, and
overshadowing all the rest, there appears the Pentateuch.
Then there is the whole array of earlier Historical
Books: Joshua, Ruth, Samuel, and Kings. The
plan of Chronicles excludes a direct use of Judges, but
it must have been well known to our author. His
appreciation of the Psalms is shown by his inserting
in his history of David a cento of passages from
Psalms xcvi., cv., and cvi.; on the other hand, Psalm
xviii. and other lyrics given in the books of Samuel
are omitted by the chronicler. The later Exilic Psalms
were more to his taste than ancient hymns, and
he unconsciously carries back into the history of the
monarchy the poetry as well as the ritual of later
times. Both omissions and insertions indicate that in
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
this period the Jews possessed and prized a large
collection of psalms.
</p>

<p>
There are also traces of the Prophets. Hanani the
seer in his address to Asa<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xvi. 9.</note> quotes Zech. iv. 10: <q>The
eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the
whole earth.</q> Jehoshaphat's exhortation to his people,
<q>Believe in the Lord your God; so shall ye be established,</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xx. 20.</note>
is based on Isa. vii. 9: <q>If ye will not believe,
surely ye shall not be established.</q> Hezekiah's words
to the Levites, <q>Our fathers ... have turned away
their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned
their backs,</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxix. 6.</note> are a significant variation of Jer. ii.
27: <q>They have turned their back unto Me, and not
their face.</q> The Temple is substituted for Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
There are of course references to Isaiah and Jeremiah
and traces of other prophets; but when account
is taken of them all, it is seen that the chronicler makes
scanty use, on the whole, of the Prophetical Books. It
is true that the idea of illustrating and supplementing
information derived from annals by means of contemporary
literature not in narrative form had not yet
dawned upon historians; but if the chronicler had taken
a tithe of the interest in the Prophets that he took in
the Pentateuch and the Psalms, his work would show
many more distinct marks of their influence.
</p>

<p>
An apocalypse like Daniel and works like Job,
Proverbs, and the other books of Wisdom lay so far
outside the plan and subject of Chronicles that we can
scarcely consider the absence of any clear trace of them
a proof that the chronicler did not either know them or
care for them.
</p>

<p>
Our brief review suggests that the literary concern
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
of the chronicler and his circle was chiefly in the books
most closely connected with the Temple; viz., the Historical
Books, which contained its history, the Pentateuch,
which prescribed its ritual, and the Psalms, which
served as its liturgy. The Prophets occupy a secondary
place, and Chronicles furnishes no clear evidence as to
other Old Testament books.
</p>

<p>
We also find in Chronicles that the Hebrew language
had degenerated from its ancient classical purity, and
that Jewish writers had already come very much under
the influence of Aramaic.
</p>

<p>
We may next consider the evidence supplied by the
chronicler as to the elements and distribution of the
Jewish community in his time. In Ezra and Nehemiah
we find the returning exiles divided into the men of
Judah, the men of Benjamin, and the priests, Levites,
etc. In Ezra ii. we are told that in all there returned
42,360, with 7,337 slaves and 200 <q>singing men and
singing women.</q> The priests numbered 4,289; there
were 74 Levites, 128 singers of the children of
Asaph, 139 porters, and 392 Nethinim and children of
Solomon's servants. The singers, porters, Nethinim,
and children of Solomon's servants are not reckoned
among the Levites, and there is only one guild of
singers: <q>the children of Asaph.</q> The Nethinim are
still distinguished from the Levites in the list of those
who returned with Ezra, and in various lists which
occur in Nehemiah. We see from the Levitical genealogies
and the Levites in 1 Chron. vi., ix., etc, that
in the time of the chronicler these arrangements had
been altered. There were now three guilds of singers,
tracing their descent to Heman, Asaph, and Ethan<note place='foot'>1 Chron. vi. 31-48, xv. 16-20; cf. psalm titles.</note> or
Jeduthun, and reckoned by descent among the Levites.
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
The guild of Heman seems to have been also known
as <q>the sons of Korah.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. vi. 33, 37; cf. Psalm lxxxviii. (title).</note> The porters and probably
eventually the Nethinim were also reckoned among the
Levites.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xvi. 38, 42.</note>
</p>

<p>
We see therefore that in the interval between
Nehemiah and the chronicler the inferior ranks of
the Temple ministry had been reorganised, the musical
staff had been enlarged and doubtless otherwise
improved, and the singers, porters, Nethinim, and
other Temple servants had been promoted to the
position of Levites. Under the monarchy many of
the Temple servants had been slaves of foreign birth;
but now a sacred character was given to the humblest
menial who shared in the work of the house of God.
In after-times Herod the Great had a number of priests
trained as masons, in order that no profane hand might
take part in the building of his temple.
</p>

<p>
Some details have been preserved of the organisation
of the Levites. We read how the porters were distributed
among the different gates, and of Levites who
were over the chambers and the treasuries, and of other
Levites how&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They lodged round about the house of God, because
the charge was upon them, and to them pertained the
opening thereof morning by morning.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And certain of them had charge of the vessels of
service; for by tale were they brought in, and by tale
were they taken out.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Some of them also were appointed over the furniture,
and over all the vessels of the sanctuary, and over the
fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense,
and the spices.</q>
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And some of the sons of the priests prepared the
confection of the spices.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And Mattithiah, one of the Levites who was the
first-born of Shallum the Korahite, had the set office
over the things that were baked in pans.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And some of their brethren, of the sons of the
Kohathites, were over the shewbread to prepare it every
sabbath.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. ix. 26-32; cf. 1 Chron. xxiii. 24-32.</note>
</p>

<p>
This account is found in a chapter partly identical
with Neh. xi., and apparently refers to the period
of Nehemiah; but the picture in the latter part of the
chapter was probably drawn by the chronicler from his
own knowledge of Temple routine. So, too, in his
graphic accounts of the sacrifices by Hezekiah and
Josiah,<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxix.-xxxi.; xxxiv.; xxxv.</note> we seem to have an eyewitness describing
familiar scenes. Doubtless the chronicler himself had
often been one of the Temple choir <q>when the burnt-offering
began, and the song of Jehovah began also,
together with the instruments of David, king of
Israel; and all the congregation worshipped, and the
singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded; and all
this continued till the burnt-offering was finished.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxix. 27, 28.</note>
Still the scale of these sacrifices, the hundreds of
oxen and thousands of sheep, may have been fixed
to accord with the splendour of the ancient kings.
Such profusion of victims probably represented rather
the dreams than the realities of the chronicler's
Temple.
</p>

<p>
Our author's strong feeling for his own Levitical
order shows itself in his narrative of Hezekiah's great
sacrifices. The victims were so numerous that there
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
were not priests enough to flay them; to meet the
emergency the Levites were allowed on this one
occasion to discharge a priestly function and to take
an unusually conspicuous part in the national festival.
In zeal they were even superior to the priests: <q>The
Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves
than the priests.</q> Possibly here the chronicler
is describing an incident which he could have paralleled
from his own experience. The priests of his time may
often have yielded to a natural temptation to shirk the
laborious and disagreeable parts of their duty; they
would catch at any plausible pretext to transfer their
burdens to the Levites, which the latter would be eager
to accept for the sake of a temporary accession of
dignity. Learned Jews were always experts in the
art of evading the most rigid and minute regulations
of the Law. For instance, the period of service
appointed for the Levites in the Pentateuch was from
the age of thirty to that of fifty.<note place='foot'>Num. iv. 3, 23, 35.</note> But we gather from
Ezra and Nehemiah that comparatively few Levites
could be induced to throw in their lot with the returning
exiles; there were not enough to perform the
necessary duties. To make up for paucity of numbers,
this period of service was increased; and they were
required to serve from twenty years old and upward.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxiii. 24, 27. Probably <q>twenty</q> should be read for
<q>thirty</q> in ver. 3.</note>
As the former arrangement had formed part of
the law attributed to Moses, in course of time the
later innovation was supposed to have originated with
David.
</p>

<p>
There were, too, other reasons for increasing the
efficiency of the Levitical order by lengthening their
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
term of service and adding to their numbers. The
establishment of the Pentateuch as the sacred code of
Judaism imposed new duties on priests and Levites
alike. The people needed teachers and interpreters of
the numerous minute and complicated rules by which
they were to govern their daily life. Judges were
needed to apply the laws in civil and criminal cases.
The Temple ministers were the natural authorities on
the Torah; they had a chief interest in expounding and
enforcing it. But in these matters also the priests
seem to have left the new duties to the Levites. Apparently
the first <q>scribes,</q> or professional students of
the Law, were mainly Levites. There were priests
among them, notably the great father of the order,
<q>Ezra the priest the scribe,</q> but the priestly families
took little share in this new work. The origin of the
educational and judicial functions of the Levites had
also come to be ascribed to the great kings of Judah.
A Levitical scribe is mentioned in the time of David.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxiv. 6.</note>
In the account of Josiah's reign we are expressly told
that <q>of the Levites there were scribes, and officers,
and porters</q>; and they are described as <q>the Levites
that taught all Israel.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxiv. 13; xxxv. 3.</note> In the same context we have
the traditional authority and justification for this new
departure. One of the chief duties imposed upon the
Levites by the Law was the care and carriage of the
Tabernacle and its furniture during the wanderings in
the wilderness. Josiah, however, bids the Levites <q>put
the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of
David, king of Israel, did build; there shall no more
be a burden upon your shoulders; now serve the Lord
your God and His people Israel.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxv. 3; cf. 1 Chron. xxiii 26.</note> In other words,
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
<q>You are relieved of a large part of your old duties,
and therefore have time to undertake new ones.</q> The
immediate application of this principle seems to be that
a section of the Levites should do all the menial work
of the sacrifices, and so leave the priests, and singers,
and porters free for their own special service; but the
same argument would be found convenient and conclusive
whenever the priests desired to impose any
new functions on the Levites.
</p>

<p>
Still the task of expounding and enforcing the Law
brought with it compensations in the shape of dignity,
influence, and emolument; and the Levites would soon
be reconciled to their work as scribes, and would
discover with regret that they could not retain the
exposition of the Law in their own hands. Traditions
were cherished in certain Levitical families that their
ancestors had been <q>officers and judges</q> under David<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxvi. 29.</note>;
and it was believed that Jehoshaphat had organised a
commission largely composed of Levites to expound
and administer the Law in country districts.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xvii. 7, 9.</note> This
commission consisted of five princes, nine Levites, and
two priests; <q>and they taught in Judah, having the
book of the law of the Lord with them; and they
went about throughout all the cities of Judah and
taught among the people.</q> As the subject of their
teaching was the Pentateuch, their mission must have
been rather judicial than religious. With regard to a
later passage, it has been suggested that <q>probably
it is the organisation of justice as existing in his own
day that he</q> (the chronicler) <q>here carries back to
Jehoshaphat, so that here most likely we have the
oldest testimony to the synedrium of Jerusalem as a
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
court of highest instance over the provincial synedria,
as also to its composition and presidency.</q><note place='foot'>Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>History of Israel</hi>, p. 191; cf. 2 Chron. xix. 4-11.</note> We can
scarcely doubt that the form the chronicler has given
to the tradition is derived from the institutions of his
own age, and that his friends the Levites were
prominent among the doctors of the Law, and not only
taught and judged in Jerusalem, but also visited the
country districts.
</p>

<p>
It will appear from this brief survey that the Levites
were very completely organised. There were not only
the great classes, the scribes, officers, porters, singers,
and the Levites proper, so to speak, who assisted the
priests, but special families had been made responsible
for details of service: <q>Mattithiah had the set office
over the things that were baked in pans; and some of
their brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, were over
the shewbread, to prepare it every sabbath.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. ix. 31, 32.</note>
</p>

<p>
The priests were organised quite differently. The
small number of Levites necessitated careful arrangements
for using them to the best advantage; of priests
there were enough and to spare. The four thousand
two hundred and eighty-nine priests who returned with
Zerubbabel were an extravagant and impossible allowance
for a single temple, and we are told that the
numbers increased largely as time went on. The
problem was to devise some means by which all the
priests should have some share in the honours and
emoluments of the Temple, and its solution was found
in the <q>courses.</q> The priests who returned with
Zerubbabel are registered in four families: <q>the children
of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua; ... the children of
Immer; ... the children of Pashhur; ... the children
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
of Harim.</q><note place='foot'>Ezra ii. 36-39.</note> But the organisation of the chronicler's
time is, as usual, to be found among the arrangements
ascribed to David, who is said to have divided the
priests into their twenty-four courses.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxiv. 1-19.</note> Amongst the
heads of the courses we find Jedaiah, Jeshua, Harim,
and Immer, but not Pashhur. Post-Biblical authorities
mention twenty-four courses in connection with the
second Temple. Zacharias, the father of John the
Baptist, belonged to the course of Abijah<note place='foot'>Luke i. 5.</note>; and Josephus
mentions a course <q>Eniakim.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bell. Jud.</hi>, IV. iii. 8.</note> Abijah was the head
of one of David's courses; and Eniakim is almost
certainly a corruption of Eliakim, of which name Jakim
in Chronicles is a contraction.
</p>

<p>
These twenty-four courses discharged the priestly
duties each in its turn. One was busy at the temple
while the other twenty-three were at home, some perhaps
living on the profits of their office, others at work
on their farms. The high-priest, of course, was always
at the Temple; and the continuity of the ritual would
necessitate the appointment of other priests as a permanent
staff. The high-priest and the staff, being
always on the spot, would have great opportunities for
improving their own position at the expense of the
other members of the courses, who were only there
occasionally for a short time. Accordingly we are
told later on that a few families had appropriated nearly
all the priestly emoluments.
</p>

<p>
Courses of the Levites are sometimes mentioned in
connection with those of the priests, as if the Levites
had an exactly similar organisation.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxiv. 20-31; 2 Chron. xxxi. 2.</note> Indeed, twenty-four
courses of the singers are expressly named.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxv.</note> But
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
on examination we find that <q>course</q> for the Levites
in all cases where exact information is given<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxvi.; Ezra vi. 18; Neh. xi. 36.</note> does not
mean one of a number of divisions which took work in
turn, but a division to which a definite piece of work
was assigned, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the care of the shewbread or of one
of the gates. The idea that in ancient times there were
twenty-four alternating courses of Levites was not
derived from the arrangements of the chronicler's
age, but was an inference from the existence of priestly
courses. According to the current interpretation of the
older history, there must have been under the monarchy
a very great many more Levites than priests, and any
reasons that existed for organising twenty-four priestly
courses would apply with equal force to the Levites.
It is true that the names of twenty-four courses of
singers are given, but in this list occurs the remarkable
and impossible group of names already discussed:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>I-have-magnified</emph>, <emph>I-have-exalted-help</emph>; <emph>Sitting-in-distress</emph>,
<emph>I-have-spoken</emph> <emph>In-abundance Visions</emph></q><note place='foot'>Recently a complaint was received at the General Post-office
that some newspapers sent from France had failed to arrive. It was
stated that the names of the papers were&mdash;<emph>Il me manque</emph>; <emph>Plusieurs;
Journaux</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, I am short of <q>Several</q> <q>Papers.</q></note> which
are in themselves sufficient proof that these twenty-four
courses of singers did not exist in the time of the
chronicler.
</p>

<p>
Thus the chronicler provides material for a fairly
complete account of the service and ministers of the
Temple; but his interest in other matters was less close
and personal, so that he gives us comparatively little
information about civil persons and affairs. The
restored Jewish community was, of course, made up
of descendants of the members of the old kingdom of
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
Judah. The new Jewish state, like the old, is often
spoken of as <q>Judah</q>; but its claim to fully represent
the chosen people of Jehovah is expressed by the
frequent use of the name <q>Israel.</q> Yet within this new
Judah the old tribes of Judah and Benjamin are still
recognised. It is true that in the register of the first
company of returning exiles the tribes are ignored, and
we are not told which families belonged to Judah or
which to Benjamin; but we are previously told that
the chiefs of Judah and Benjamin rose up to return
to Jerusalem. Part of this register arranges the companies
according to the towns in which their ancestors
had lived before the Captivity, and of these some belong
to Judah and some to Benjamin. We also learn that
the Jewish community included certain of the children
of Ephraim and Manasseh.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. ix. 3.</note> There may also have been
families from the other tribes; St. Luke, for instance,
describes Anna as of the tribe of Asher.<note place='foot'>Luke ii. 36.</note> But the
mass of genealogical matter relating to Judah and
Benjamin far exceeds what is given as to the other
tribes,<note place='foot'>Levi of course excepted.</note> and proves that Judah and Benjamin were
co-ordinate members of the restored community, and
that no other tribe contributed any appreciable contingent,
except a few families from Ephraim and
Manasseh. It has been suggested that the chronicler
shows special interest in the tribes which had occupied
Galilee&mdash;Asher, Naphtali, Zebulun, and Issachar&mdash;and
that this special interest indicates that the settlement
of Jews in Galilee had attained considerable dimensions
at the time when he wrote. But this special interest
is not very manifest; and later on, in the time of the
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
Maccabees, the Jews in Galilee were so few that Simon
took them all away with him, together with their wives
and their children and all that they had, and brought
them into Judæa.
</p>

<p>
The genealogies seem to imply that no descendants
of the Transjordanic tribes or of Simeon were found in
Judah in the age of the chronicler.
</p>

<p>
Concerning the tribe of Judah, we have already noted
that it included two families which traced their descent
to Egyptian ancestors, and that the Kenizzite clans of
Caleb and Jerahmeel had been entirely incorporated in
Judah and formed the most important part of the tribe.
A comparison of the parallel genealogies of the house
of Caleb gives us important information as to the
territory occupied by the Jews. In ii. 42-49 we find
the Calebites at Hebron and other towns of the south
country, in accordance with the older history; but in
ii. 50-55 they occupy Bethlehem and Kirjath-jearim
and other towns in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem.
The two paragraphs are really giving their territory
before and after the Exile; during the Captivity Southern
Judah had been occupied by the Edomites. It is
indeed stated in Neh. xi. 25-30 that the children of
Judah dwelt in a number of towns scattered over the
whole territory of the ancient tribe; but the list concludes
with the significant sentence, <q>So they <emph>encamped</emph>
from Beer-sheba unto the valley of Hinnom.</q> We are
thus given to understand that the occupation was not
permanent.
</p>

<p>
We have already noted that much of the space
allotted to the genealogies of Judah is devoted to the
house of David.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. iii.</note> The form of this pedigree for the
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
generations after the Captivity indicates that the head
of the house of David was no longer the chief of the
state. During the monarchy only the kings are given
as heads of the family in each generation: <q>Solomon's
son was Rehoboam, Abijah his son, Asa his son,</q> etc.,
etc.; but after the Captivity the first-born no longer
occupied so unique a position. We have all the sons of
each successive head of the family.
</p>

<p>
The genealogies of Judah include one or two references
which throw a little light on the social organisation
of the times. There were <q>families of scribes
which dwelt at Jabez</q><note place='foot'>ii. 55.</note> as well as the Levitical scribes.
In the appendix<note place='foot'>iv. 21-23.</note> to the genealogies of chap. iv. we
read of a house whose families wrought fine linen, and
of other families who were porters to the king and
lived on the royal estates. The immediate reference
of these statements is clearly to the monarchy, and we
are told that <q>the records are ancient</q>; but these
ancient records were probably obtained by the
chronicler from contemporary members of the families,
who still pursued their hereditary calling.
</p>

<p>
As regards the tribe of Benjamin, we have seen that
there was a family claiming descent from Saul.
</p>

<p>
The slight and meagre information given about Judah
and Benjamin cannot accurately represent their importance
as compared with the priests and Levites, but the
general impression conveyed by the chronicler is confirmed
by our other authorities. In his time the
supreme interests of the Jews were religious. The one
great institution was the Temple; the highest order was
the priesthood. All Jews were in a measure servants
of the Temple; Ephesus indeed was proud to be called
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
the temple-keeper of the great Diana, but Jerusalem
was far more truly the temple-keeper of Jehovah.
Devotion to the Temple gave to the Jews a unity
which neither of the older Hebrew states had ever
possessed. The kernel of this later Jewish territory
seems to have been a comparatively small district of
which Jerusalem was the centre. The inhabitants
of this district carefully preserved the records of their
family history, and loved to trace their descent to the
ancient clans of Judah and Benjamin; but for practical
purposes they were all Jews, without distinction of
tribe. Even the ministry of the Temple had become
more homogeneous; the non-Levitical descent of some
classes of the Temple servants was first ignored and
then forgotten, so that assistants at the sacrifices,
singers, musicians, scribes, and porters, were all included
in the tribe of Levi. The Temple conferred its own
sanctity upon all its ministers.
</p>

<p>
In a previous chapter the Temple and its ministry
were compared to a mediæval monastery or the establishment
of a modern cathedral. In the same way
Jerusalem might be compared to cities, like Ely or
Canterbury, which exist mainly for the sake of their
cathedrals, only both the sanctuary and city of the
Jews came to be on a larger scale. Or, again, if the
Temple be represented by the great abbey of St.
Edmundsbury, Bury St. Edmunds itself might stand
for Jerusalem, and the wide lands of the abbey for the
surrounding districts, from which the Jewish priests
derived their free-will offerings, and first-fruits, and
tithes. Still in both these English instances there was
a vigorous and independent secular life far beyond any
that existed in Judæa.
</p>

<p>
A closer parallel to the temple on Zion is to be
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
found in the immense establishments of the Egyptian
temples. It is true that these were numerous in Egypt,
and the authority and influence of the priesthood were
checked and controlled by the power of the kings;
yet on the fall of the twentieth dynasty the high-priest
of the great temple of Amen at Thebes succeeded in
making himself king, and Egypt, like Judah, had its
dynasty of priest-kings.
</p>

<p>
The following is an account of the possessions of
the Theban temple of Amen, supposed to be given by
an Egyptian living about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1350<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Ancient Egypt and Assyria</hi>, p. 60.</note>:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Since the accession of the eighteenth dynasty,
Amen has profited more than any other god, perhaps
even more than Pharaoh himself, by the Egyptian
victories over the peoples of Syria and Ethiopia. Each
success has brought him a considerable share of the
spoil collected upon the battle-fields, indemnities levied
from the enemy, prisoners carried into slavery. He
possesses lands and gardens by the hundred in Thebes
and the rest of Egypt, fields and meadows, woods,
hunting-grounds, and fisheries; he has colonies in
Ethiopia or in the oases of the Libyan desert, and at
the extremity of the land of Canaan there are cities
under vassalage to him, for Pharaoh allows him to
receive the tribute from them. The administration of
these vast properties requires as many officials and
departments as that of a kingdom. It includes innumerable
bailiffs for the agriculture; overseers for
the cattle and poultry; treasurers of twenty kinds for
the gold, silver, and copper, the vases and valuable
stuffs; foremen for the workshops and manufactures;
engineers; architects; boatmen; a fleet and an army
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
which often fight by the side of Pharaoh's fleet and
army. It is really a state within the state.</q>
</p>

<p>
Many of the details of this picture would not be true
for the temple of Zion; but the Jews were even more
devoted to Jehovah than the Thebans to Amen, and
the administration of the Jewish temple was more than
<q>a state within the state</q>: it was the state itself.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Teaching By Anachronism.
1 Chron. ix. (cf. xv., xvi., xxiii.-xxvii., etc.).</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>And David the king said, ... Who then offereth willingly?...
And they gave for the service of the house of God ... ten thousand
darics.</q>&mdash;1 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Chron.</hi> xxix. 1, 5, 7.
</quote>

<p>
Teaching by anachronism is a very common
and effective form of religious instruction; and
Chronicles, as the best Scriptural example of this
method, affords a good opportunity for its discussion
and illustration.
</p>

<p>
All history is more or less guilty of anachronism;
every historian perforce imports some of the ideas and
circumstances of his own time into his narratives and
pictures of the past: but we may distinguish three
degrees of anachronism. Some writers or speakers
make little or no attempt at archæological accuracy;
others temper the generally anachronistic character
of their compositions by occasional reference to the
manners and customs of the period they are describing;
and, again, there are a few trained students who
succeed in drawing fairly accurate and consistent
pictures of ancient life and history.
</p>

<p>
We will briefly consider the last two classes before
returning to the first, in which we are chiefly interested.
</p>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<p>
Accurate archæology is, of course, part of the ideal
of the scientific historian. By long and careful study
of literature and monuments and by the exercise of
a lively and well-trained imagination, the student
obtains a vision of ancient societies. Nineveh and
Babylon, Thebes and Memphis, rise from their ashes
and stand before him in all their former splendour;
he walks their streets and mixes with the crowds in
the market-place and the throng of worshippers at the
temple, each <q>in his habit as he lived.</q> Rameses
and Sennacherib, Ptolemy and Antiochus, all play their
proper parts in this drama of his fancy. He can not
only recall their costumes and features: he can even
think their thoughts and feel their emotions; he actually
lives in the past. In <hi rend='italic'>Marius the Epicurean</hi>, in Ebers's
<hi rend='italic'>Uarda</hi>, in Maspero's <hi rend='italic'>Sketches of Assyrian and Egyptian
Life</hi>, and in other more serious works we have some of
the fruits of this enlightened study of antiquity, and
are enabled to see the visions at second hand and in
some measure to live at once in the present and the
past, to illustrate and interpret the one by the other,
to measure progress and decay, and to understand the
Divine meaning of all history. Our more recent
histories and works on life and manners and even our
historical romances, especially those of Walter Scott,
have rendered a similar service to students of English
history. And yet at its very best such realisation of
the past is imperfect; the gaps in our information are
unconsciously filled in from our experience, and the
ideas of the present always colour our reproduction of
ancient thought and feeling. The most accurate history
is only a rough approximation to exact truth; but, like
many other rough approximations, it is exact enough
for many important practical purposes.
</p>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<p>
But scholarly familiarity with the past has its drawbacks.
The scholar may come to live so much amongst
ancient memories that he loses touch with his own
present. He may gain large stores of information
about ancient Israelite life, and yet not know enough
of his own generation to be able to make them sharers
of his knowledge. Their living needs and circumstances
lie outside his practical experience; he cannot
explain the past to them because he does not sympathise
with their present; he cannot apply its lessons to
difficulties and dangers which he does not understand.
</p>

<p>
Nor is the usefulness of the archæologist merely
limited by his own lack of sympathy and experience.
He may have both, and yet find that there are few of
his contemporaries who can follow him in his excursions
into bygone time. These limitations and drawbacks
do not seriously diminish the value of archæology, but
they have to be taken into account in discussing teaching
by anachronism, and they have an important
bearing on the practical application of archæological
knowledge. We shall return to these points later on.
</p>

<p>
The second degree of anachronism is very common.
We are constantly hearing and reading descriptions
of Bible scenes and events in which the centuries
before and after Christ are most oddly blended. Here
and there will be a costume after an ancient monument,
a Biblical description of Jewish customs, a few Scriptural
phrases; but these are embedded in paragraphs
which simply reproduce the social and religious ideas
of the nineteenth century. For instance, in a recent
work, amidst much display of archæological knowledge,
we have the very modern ideas that Joseph and Mary
went up to Bethlehem at the census, because Joseph
and perhaps Mary also had property in Bethlehem, and
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
that when Joseph died <q>he left her a small but independent
fortune.</q> Many modern books might be
named in which Patriarchs and Apostles hold the language
and express the sentiments of the most recent
schools of devotional Christianity; and yet an air of
historical accuracy is assumed by occasional touches
of archæology. Similarly in mediæval miracle-plays
characters from the Bible appeared in the dress of the
period, and uttered a grotesque mixture of Scriptural
phrases and vernacular jargon. Much of such work
as this may for all practical purposes be classed
under the third degree of anachronism. Sometimes,
however, the spiritual significance of a passage or an
incident turns upon a simple explanation of some
ancient custom, so that the archæological detail makes
a clear addition to its interest and instructiveness.
But in other cases a little archæology is a dangerous
thing. Scattered fragments of learned information do
not enable the reader in any way to revive the buried
past; they only remove the whole subject further from
his interest and sympathy. He is not reading about
his own day, nor does he understand that the events
and personages of the narrative ever had anything in
common with himself and his experience. The antique
garb, the strange custom, the unusual phrase, disguise
that real humanity which the reader shares with these
ancient worthies. They are no longer men of like
passions with himself, and he finds neither warning
nor encouragement in their story. He is like a spectator
of a drama played by poor actors with a limited
stock of properties. The scenery and dresses show
that the play does not belong to his own time, but they
fail to suggest that it ever belonged to any period.
He has a languid interest in the performance as a
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
spectacle, but his feelings are not touched, and he is
never carried away by the acting.
</p>

<p>
We have laid so much stress on the drawbacks
attaching to a little archæology because they will
emphasise what we have to say about the use of pure
anachronism. Our last illustration, however, reminds
us that these drawbacks detract but little from the
influence of earnest men. If the acting be good, we
forget the scenery and costumes; the genius of a great
preacher more than atones for poor archæology, because,
in spite of dress and custom, he makes his hearers feel
that the characters of the Bible were instinct with rich
and passionate life. We thus arrive at our third degree
of pure anachronism.
</p>

<p>
Most people read their Bible without any reference
to archæology. If they dramatise the stories, they do
so in terms of their own experience. The characters
are dressed like the men and women they know:
Nazareth is like their native village, and Jerusalem is
like the county town; the conversations are carried on
in the English of the Authorised Version. This reading
of Scripture is well illustrated by the description in a
recent writer of a modern prophet in Tennessee<note place='foot'>Craddock, <hi rend='italic'>Despot of Bromsgrove Edge</hi>. Teck Jepson is, of course,
an imaginary character, but none the less representative.</note>:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>There was nought in the scene to suggest to a
mind familiar with the facts an Oriental landscape&mdash;nought
akin to the hills of Judæa. It was essentially
of the New World, essentially of the Great Smoky
Mountains. Yet ignorance has its licence. It never
occurred to Teck Jepson that his Bible heroes had lived
elsewhere. Their history had to him an intimate personal
relation, as of the story of an ancestor, in the
homestead ways and closely familiar. He brooded
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
upon these narratives, instinct with dramatic interest,
enriched with poetic colour, and localised in his robust
imagination, till he could trace Hagar's wild wanderings
in the fastnesses, could show where Jacob slept and
piled his altar of stones, could distinguish the bush, of
all others on the <q>bald,</q> that blazed with fire from
heaven when the angel of the Lord stood within it.
Somehow, even in their grotesque variation, they
lost no dignity in their transmission to the modern
conditions of his fancy. Did the facts lack significance
because it was along the gullied red clay roads of
Piomingo Cove that he saw David, the smiling stripling,
running and holding high in his hand the bit of cloth
cut from Saul's garments while the king had slept in
a cave at the base of Chilhowie Mountain? And how
was the splendid miracle of translation discredited
because Jepson believed that the chariot of the Lord
had rested in scarlet and purple clouds upon the towering
summit of Thunderhead, that Elijah might thence
ascend into heaven?</q>
</p>

<p>
Another and more familiar example of <q>singular alterations
in date and circumstances</q> is the version in <hi rend='italic'>Ivanhoe</hi>
of the war between Benjamin and the other tribes:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>How long since in Palestine a deadly feud arose
between the tribe of Benjamin and the rest of the
Israelitish nation; and how they cut to pieces well-nigh
all the chivalry of that tribe; and how they swore by
our blessed Lady that they would not permit those who
remained to marry in their lineage; and how they
became grieved for their vow, and sent to consult his
Holiness the Pope how they might be absolved from
it; and how, by the advice of the Holy Father, the
youth of the tribe of Benjamin carried off from a superb
tournament all the ladies who were there present, and
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
thus won them wives without the consent either of
their brides or their brides' families.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is needless to say that the chronicler was not thus
hopelessly at sea about the circumstances of ancient
Hebrew history; but he wrote in the same simple,
straightforward, childlike spirit. Israel had always
been the Israel of his own experience, and it never
occurred to him that its institutions under the kings
had been other than those with which he was familiar.
He had no more hesitation in filling up the gaps in the
book of Kings from what he saw round about him
than a painter would have in putting the white clouds
and blue waters of to-day into a picture of skies and
seas a thousand years ago. He attributes to the pious
kings of Judah the observance of the ritual of his own
times. Their prophets use phrases taken from post-Exilic
writings. David is regarded as the author of
the existing ecclesiastical system in almost all matters
that do not date back to Moses, and especially as
the organiser of the familiar music of the Temple.
David's choristers sing the hymns of the second
Temple. Amongst the contributions of his nobles
towards the building of the Temple, we read of ten
thousand darics, the daric being a coin introduced by
the Persian king Darius.
</p>

<p>
But we must be careful to recognise that the
chronicler writes in perfect good faith. These views
of the monarchy were common to all educated and
thoughtful men of his time; they were embodied in
current tradition, and were probably already to be met
with in writing. To charge him with inventing them
is absurd; they already existed, and did not need to be
invented. He cannot have coloured his narrative in
the interests of the Temple and the priesthood. When
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
he lived, these interests were guaranteed by ancient
custom and by the authoritative sanction of the Pentateuchal
Law. The chronicler does not write with the
strong feeling of a man who maintains a doubtful cause;
there is no hint of any alternative view which needs
to be disproved and rejected in favour of his own. He
expatiates on his favourite themes with happy, leisurely
serenity, and is evidently confident that his treatment
of them will meet with general and cordial approval.
</p>

<p>
And doubtless the author of Chronicles <q>served his
own generation by the will of God,</q> and served them
in the way he intended. He made the history of the
monarchy more real and living to them, and enabled
them to understand better that the reforming kings of
Judah were loyal servants of Jehovah and had been
used by Him for the furtherance of true religion. The
pictures drawn by Samuel and Kings of David and
the best of his successors would not have enabled the
Jews of his time to appreciate these facts. They had no
idea of any piety that was not expressed in the current
observances of the Law, and Samuel and Kings did not
ascribe such observances to the earlier kings of Judah.
But the chronicler and his authorities were able to
discern in the ancient Scriptures the genuine piety of
David and Hezekiah and other kings, and drew what
seemed to them the obvious conclusion that these pious
kings observed the Law. They then proceeded to
rewrite the history in order that the true character of
the kings and their relation to Jehovah might be made
intelligible to the people. The only piety which the
chronicler could conceive was combined with observance
of the Law; naturally therefore it was only thus
that he could describe piety. His work would be read
with eager interest, and would play a definite and
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
useful part in the religious education of the people. It
would bring home to them, as the older histories could
not, the abiding presence of Jehovah with Israel and
its leaders. Chronicles interpreted history to its own
generation by translating older records into the circumstances
and ideas of its own time.
</p>

<p>
And in this it remains our example. Chronicles may
fall very far short of the ideal and yet be superior to
more accurate histories which fail to make themselves
intelligible to their own generation. The ideal history
no doubt would tell the story with archæological precision,
and then interpret it by modern parallels; the
historian would show us what we should actually have
seen and heard if we had lived in the period he is
describing; he would also help our weak imagination
by pointing us to such modern events or persons as
best illustrate those ancient times. No doubt Chronicles
fails to bring before our eyes an accurate vision of the
history of the monarchy; but, as we have said, all
history fails somewhat in this respect. It is simply
impossible to fulfil the demand for history that shall
have the accuracy of an architect's plans of a house
or an astronomer's diagrams of the orbit of a planet.
Chronicles, however, fails more seriously than most
history, and on the whole rather more than most
commentaries and sermons.
</p>

<p>
But this lack of archæological accuracy is far less
serious than a failure to make it clear that the events
of ancient history were as real and as interesting as
those of modern times, and that its personages were
actual men and women, with a full equipment of body,
mind, and soul. There have been many teachers and
preachers, innocent of archæology, who have yet been
able to apply Bible narratives with convincing power
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
to the hearts and consciences of their hearers. They
may have missed some points and misunderstood
others, but they have brought out clearly the main,
practical teaching of their subject; and we must not
allow amusement at curious anachronisms to blind us
to their great gifts in applying ancient history to
modern circumstances. For instance, the little captive
maid in the story of Naaman has been described by a
local preacher as having illuminated texts hung up in
her bedroom, and (perambulators not being then in
use) as having constructed a go-cart for the baby out
of an old tea-chest and four cotton reels. We feel
inclined to smile; but, after all, such a picture would
make children feel that the captive maid was a girl
whom they could understand and might even imitate.
A more correct version of the story, told with less
human interest, might leave the impression that she
was a mere animated doll in a quaint costume, who
made impossibly pious remarks.
</p>

<p>
Enlightened and well-informed Christian teachers
may still learn something from the example of the
chronicler. The uncritical character of his age affords
no excuse to them for shutting their eyes to the fuller
light which God has given to their generation. But
we are reminded that permanently significant stories
have their parallels in every age. There are always
prodigal sons, and foolish virgins, importunate widows,
and good Samaritans. The ancient narratives are
interesting as quaint and picturesque stories of former
times; but it is our duty as teachers to discover the
modern parallels of their eternal meaning: their lessons
are often best enforced by telling them afresh as they
would have been told if their authors had lived in our
time, in other words by a frank use of anachronism.
</p>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<p>
It may be objected that the result in the case of
Chronicles is not encouraging. Chronicles is far less
interesting than Kings, and far less useful in furnishing
materials for the historian. These facts, however, are not
inconsistent with the usefulness of the book for its own
age. Teaching by anachronism simply seeks to render
a service to its own generation; its purpose is didactic,
and not historical. How many people read the sermons
of eighteenth-century divines? But each generation
has a right to this special service. The first duty of
the religious teacher is for the men and women that
look to him for spiritual help and guidance. He may
incidentally produce literary work of permanent value
for posterity; but a Church whose ministry sacrificed
practical usefulness in the attempt to be learned and
literary would be false to its most sacred functions.
The noblest self-denial of Christian service may often lie
in putting aside all such ambition and devoting the
ability which might have made a successful author to
making Divine truth intelligible and interesting to the
uncultured and the unimaginative. Authors themselves
are sometimes led to make a similar sacrifice;
they write to help the many to-day when they might
have written to delight men of literary taste in all ages.
Few things are so ephemeral as popular religious
literature; it is as quickly and entirely forgotten as last
year's sunsets: but it is as necessary and as useful as
the sunshine and the clouds, which are being always
spent and always renewed. Chronicles is a specimen
of this class of literature, and its presence in the canon
testifies to the duty of providing a special application of
the sacred truths of ancient history for each succeeding
generation.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book III. Messianic And Other Types.</head>

<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Teaching By Types.</head>

<p>
A more serious charge has been brought against
Chronicles than that dealt with in the last chapter.
Besides anachronisms, additions, and alterations, the
chronicler has made omissions that give an entirely
new complexion to the history. He omits, for instance,
almost everything that detracts from the character and
achievements of David and Solomon; he almost
entirely ignores the reigns of Saul and Ishbosheth,
and of all the northern kings. These facts are obvious
to the most casual reader, and a moment's reflection
shows that David as we should know him if we had
only Chronicles is entirely different from the historical
David of Samuel and Kings. The latter David has
noble qualities, but displays great weakness and falls
into grievous sin; the David of Chronicles is almost
always an hero and a blameless saint.
</p>

<p>
All this is unquestionably true, and yet the purpose
and spirit of Chronicles are honest and praiseworthy.
Our judgment must be governed by the relation which
the chronicler intended his work to sustain towards the
older history. Did he hope that Samuel and Kings
would be altogether superseded by this new version
of the history of the monarchy, and so eventually be
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
suppressed and forgotten? There were precedents
that might have encouraged such a hope. The Pentateuch
and the books from Joshua to Kings derived their
material from older works; but the older works were
superseded by these books, and entirely disappeared.
The circumstances, however, were different when the
chronicler wrote: Samuel and Kings had been established
for centuries. Moreover, the Jewish community
in Babylon still exercised great influence over the
Palestinian Jews. Copies of Samuel and Kings must
have been preserved at Babylon, and their possessors
could not be eager to destroy them, and then to incur
the expense of replacing them by copies of a history
written at Jerusalem from the point of view of the
priests and Levites. We may therefore put aside
the theory that Chronicles was intended altogether to
supersede Samuel and Kings. Another possible theory
is that the chronicler, after the manner of mediæval
historians, composed an abstract of the history of the
world from the Creation to the Captivity as an introduction
to his account in Ezra and Nehemiah of the
more recent post-Exilic period. This theory has some
truth in it, but does not explain the fact that Chronicles
is disproportionately long if it be merely such an introduction.
Probably the chronicler's main object was to
compose a text-book, which could safely and usefully be
placed in the hands of the common people. There
were obvious objections to the popular use of Samuel
and Kings. In making a selection from his material,
the chronicler had no intention of falsifying history.
Scholars, he knew, would be acquainted with the older
books, and could supplement his narrative from the
sources which he himself had used. In his own work
he was anxious to confine himself to the portions of the
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
history which had an obvious religious significance,
and could readily be used for purposes of edification.
He was only applying more thoroughly a principle that
had guided his predecessors. The Pentateuch itself
is the result of a similar selection, only there and in
the other earlier histories a very human interest in
dramatic narrative has sometimes interfered with an
exclusive attention to edification.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, the principles of selection adopted by the
chronicler are common to many historians. A school
history does not dwell on the domestic vices of kings
or on the private failings of statesmen. It requires no
great stretch of imagination to conceive of a Royalist
history of England, that should entirely ignore the
Commonwealth. Indeed, historians of Christian missions
sometimes show about the same interest in the
work of other Churches than their own that Chronicles
takes in the northern kingdom. The work of the
chronicler may also be compared to monographs which
confine themselves to some special aspect of their
subject. We have every reason to be thankful that
the Divine providence has preserved for us the richer
and fuller narrative of Samuel and Kings, but we cannot
blame the chronicler because he has observed some of
the ordinary canons for the composition of historical
text-books.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's selective method, however, is carried
so far that the historical value of his work is seriously
impaired; yet in this respect also he is kept in countenance
by very respectable authorities. We are more
concerned, however, to point out the positive results of
the method. Instead of historical portraits, we are presented
with a gallery of ideals, types of character which
we are asked either to admire or to condemn. On
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
the one hand, we have David and Solomon, Jehoshaphat
and Hezekiah, and the rest of the reforming kings of
Judah; on the other hand, there are Jeroboam, and
Ahab, and Ahaz, the kings of Israel, and the bad kings
of Judah. All these are very sharply defined in either
white or black. The types of Chronicles are ideals,
and not studies of ordinary human character, with its
mingled motives and subtle gradations of light and
shade. The chronicler has nothing in common with
the authors of modern realistic novels or anecdotal
memoirs. His subject is not human nature as it is so
much as human nature as it ought to be. There is
obviously much to be learnt from such ideal pictures,
and this form of inspired teaching is by no means the
least effective; it may be roughly compared with our
Lord's method of teaching by parables, without,
however, at all putting the two upon the same level.
</p>

<p>
Before examining these types in detail, we may
devote a little space to some general considerations
upon teaching by types. For the present we will
confine ourselves to a non-theological sense of type,
using the word to mean any individual who is representative
or typical of a class. But the chronicler's
individuals do not represent classes of actual persons,
but good men as they seem to their most devoted
admirers and bad men as they seem to their worst
enemies. They are ideal types. Chronicles is not the
only literature in which such ideal types are found.
They occur in the funeral sermons and obituary notices
of popular favourites, and in the pictures which
politicians draw in election speeches of their opponents,
only in these there is a note of personal feeling from
which the chronicler is free.
</p>

<p>
In fact, all biography tends to idealise; human nature
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
as it is has generally to be looked for in the pages of
fiction. When we have been blessed with a good and
brave man, we wish to think of him at his best; we
are not anxious to have thrust upon our notice the
weaknesses and sins which he regretted and for the
most part controlled. Some one who loved and
honoured him is asked to write the biography, with a
tacit understanding that he is not to give us a picture
of the real man in the <foreign rend='italic'>déshabille</foreign>, as it were, of his own
inner consciousness. He is to paint us a portrait of
the man as he strove to fashion himself after his own
high ideal. The true man, as God knows him and as
his fellows should remember him, was the man in his
higher nature and nobler aspirations. The rest, surely,
was but the vanishing remnant of a repudiated self.
The biographer idealises, because he believes that the
ideal best represents the real man. This is what the
chronicler, with a large faith and liberal charity, has
done for David and Solomon.
</p>

<p>
Such an ideal picture appeals to us with pathetic
emphasis. It seems to say, <q>In spite of temptation,
and sin, and grievous falls, this is what I ever aimed at
and desired to be. Do not thou content thyself with any
lower ideal. My higher nature had its achievements
as well as its aspirations. Remember that in thy
weakness thou mayest also achieve.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>What I aspired to be,</q></l>
<l>And was not, comforts me;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All I could never be,</l>
<l>All men ignored in me,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>This I was worth to God....</q></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
But we may take these ideals as types, not only in
a general sense, but also in a modification of the
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
dogmatic meaning of the word. We are not concerned
here with the type as the mere external symbol of
truth yet to be revealed; such types are chiefly found
in the ritual of the Pentateuch. The circumstances of
a man's life may also serve as a type in the narrower
sense, but we venture to apply the theological idea of
type to the significance of the higher nature in a good
man. It has been said in reference to types in the
theological sense that <q>a type is neither a prophecy,
nor a symbol, nor an allegory, yet it has relations with
each of these. A prophecy is a prediction in words, a
type a prediction in things. A symbol is a sensuous
representation of a thing; a type is such a representation
having a distinctly predictive aspect: ... a type is
an enacted prophecy, a kind of prophecy by action.</q><note place='foot'>Cave, <hi rend='italic'>Scripture Doctrine of Sacrifice</hi>, p. 163.</note>
We cannot, of course, include in our use of the term
type <q>sensuous representation</q> and some other ideas
connected with <q>type</q> in a theological sense. Our
type is a prediction in persons rather than in things.
But the use of the term is justified as including the
most essential point: that <q>a type is an enacted prophecy,
a kind of prophecy by action.</q> These personal types
are the most real and significant; they have no mere
arbitrary or conventional relation to their antitype.
The enacted prophecy is the beginning of its own
fulfilment, the first-fruits of the greater harvest that is
to be. The better moments of the man who is hungering
and thirsting after righteousness are a type, a
promise, and prophecy of his future satisfaction. They
have also a wider and deeper meaning: they show
what is possible for humanity, and give an assurance of
the spiritual progress of the world. The elect remnant
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
of Israel were the type of the great Christian Church;
the spiritual aspirations and persistent faith of a few
believers were a prophecy that <q>the earth should be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
the sea.</q> <q>The kingdom of heaven is like unto a
grain of mustard seed, ... which is less than all seeds;
but when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs,
and becometh a tree.</q> When therefore the chronicler
ignores the evil in David and Solomon and only records
the good, he treats them as types. He takes what
was best in them and sets it forth as a standard and
prophecy for the future, a pattern in the mount to be
realised hereafter in the structure of God's spiritual
temple upon earth.
</p>

<p>
But the Holy Spirit guided the hopes and intuitions
of the sacred writers to a special fulfilment. We can
see that their types have one antitype in the growth of
the Church and the progress of mankind; but the Old
Testament looked for their chief fulfilment in a Divine
Messenger and Deliverer: its ideals are types of the
Messiah. The higher life of a good man was a revelation
of God and a promise of His highest and best
manifestation in Christ. We shall endeavour to show
in subsequent chapters how Chronicles served to develop
the idea of the Messiah.
</p>

<p>
But the chronicler's types are not all prophecies of
future progress or Messianic glory. The brighter portions
of his picture are thrown into relief by a dark
background. The good in Jeroboam is as completely
ignored as the evil in David. Apart from any question
of historical accuracy, the type is unfortunately a true
one. There is a leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod,
as well as a leaven of the kingdom. If the base leaven
be left to work by itself, it will leaven the whole mass;
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
and in a final estimate of the character of those who
do evil <q>with both hands earnestly,</q> little allowance
needs to be made for redeeming features. Even if we
are still able to believe that there is a seed of goodness
in things evil, we are forced to admit that the seed has
remained dead and unfertilised, has had no growth and
borne no fruit. But probably most men may sometimes
be profitably admonished by considering the
typical sinner&mdash;the man in whose nature evil has been
able to subdue all things to itself.
</p>

<p>
The strange power of teaching by types has been
well expressed by one who was herself a great mistress
of the art: <q>Ideas are often poor ghosts: our sun-filled
eyes cannot discern them; they pass athwart us
in thin vapour, and cannot make themselves felt; they
breathe upon us with warm breath, they touch us with
soft, responsive hands; they look at us with sad, sincere
eyes, and speak to us in appealing tones; they are
clothed in a living human soul; ... their presence
is a power.</q><note place='foot'>George Eliot, <hi rend='italic'>Janet's Repentance</hi>, chap. xix.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. David&mdash;I. His Tribe And Dynasty.</head>

<p>
King and kingdom were so bound up in ancient
life that an ideal for the one implied an ideal for
the other; all distinction and glory possessed by either
was shared by both. The tribe and kingdom of Judah
were exalted by the fame of David and Solomon; but,
on the other hand, a specially exalted position is
accorded to David in the Old Testament because he
is the representative of the people of Jehovah. David
himself had been anointed by Divine command to be
king of Israel, and he thus became the founder of the
only legitimate dynasty of Hebrew kings. Saul and
Ishbosheth had no significance for the later religious
history of the nation. Apparently to the chronicler the
history of true religion in Israel was a blank between
Joshua and David; the revival began when the Ark was
brought to Zion, and the first steps were taken to rear
the Temple in succession to the Mosaic tabernacle.
He therefore omits the history of the Judges and Saul.
But the battle of Gilboa is given to introduce the reign
of David, and incidental condemnation is passed on
Saul: <q>So Saul died for his trespass which he committed
against the Lord, because of the word of the
Lord, which he kept not, and also for that he asked
counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to inquire
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
thereby, and inquired not of the Lord; therefore He
slew him and turned the kingdom unto David the son
of Jesse.</q>
</p>

<p>
The reign of Saul had been an unsuccessful experiment;
its only real value had been to prepare the way
for David. At the same time the portrait of Saul is
not given at full length, like those of the wicked kings,
partly perhaps because the chronicler had little interest
for anything before the time of David and the Temple,
but partly, we may hope, because the record of David's
affection for Saul kept alive a kindly feeling towards the
founder of the monarchy.
</p>

<p>
Inasmuch as Jehovah had <q>turned the kingdom unto
David,</q> the reign of Ishbosheth was evidently the
intrusion of an illegitimate pretender; and the chronicler
treats it as such. If we had only Chronicles, we should
know nothing about the reign of Ishbosheth, and should
suppose that, on the death of Saul, David succeeded at
once to an undisputed sovereignty over all Israel. The
interval of conflict is ignored because, according to the
chronicler's views, David was, from the first, king <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
jure</foreign> over the whole nation. Complete silence as to
Ishbosheth was the most effective way of expressing
this fact.
</p>

<p>
The same sentiment of hereditary legitimacy, the
same formal and exclusive recognition of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de jure</foreign>
sovereign, has been shown in modern times by titles
like Louis XVIII. and Napoleon III. For both schools
of Legitimists the absence of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de facto</foreign> sovereignty did
not prevent Louis XVII. and Napoleon II. from
having been lawful rulers of France. In Israel, moreover,
the Divine right of the one chosen dynasty had
religious as well as political importance. We have
already seen that Israel claimed a hereditary title to
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
its special privileges; it was therefore natural that a
hereditary qualification should be thought necessary
for the kings. They represented the nation; they were
the Divinely appointed guardians of its religion; they
became in time the types of the Messiah, its promised
Saviour. In all this Saul and Ishbosheth had neither
part nor lot; the promise to Israel had always descended
in a direct line, and the special promise that was given
to its kings and through them to their people began
with David. There was no need to carry the history
further back.
</p>

<p>
We have already noticed that, in spite of this general
attitude towards Saul, the genealogy of some of his
descendants is given twice over in the earlier chapters.
No doubt the chronicler made this concession to gratify
friends or to conciliate an influential family. It is
interesting to note how personal feeling may interfere
with the symmetrical development of a theological
theory. At the same time we are enabled to discern
a practical reason for rigidly ignoring the kingship of
Saul and Ishbosheth. To have recognised Saul as the
Lord's anointed, like David, would have complicated
contemporary dogmatics, and might possibly have given
rise to jealousies between the descendants of Saul and
those of David. Within the narrow limits of the
Jewish community such quarrels might have been
inconvenient and even dangerous.
</p>

<p>
The reasons for denying the legitimacy of the
northern kings were obvious and conclusive. Successful
rebels who had destroyed the political and religious
unity of Israel could not inherit <q>the sure mercies of
David</q> or be included in the covenant which secured
the permanence of his dynasty.
</p>

<p>
The exclusive association of Messianic ideas with a
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
single family emphasises their antiquity, continuity,
and development. The hope of Israel had its roots
deep in the history of the people; it had grown with
their growth and maintained itself through their
changing fortunes. As the hope centred in a single
family, men were led to expect an individual personal
Messiah; they were being prepared to see in Christ
the fulfilment of all righteousness.
</p>

<p>
But the choice of the house of David involved the
choice of the tribe of Judah and the rejection of the kingdom
of Samaria. The ten tribes, as well as the kings of
Israel, had cut themselves off both from the Temple and
the sacred dynasty, and therefore from the covenant into
which Jehovah had entered with <q>the man after his
own heart.</q> Such a limitation of the chosen people was
suggested by many precedents. Chronicles, following
the Pentateuch, tells how the call came to Abraham,
but only some of the descendants of one of his sons
inherited the promise. Why should not a selection be
made from among the sons of Jacob? But the twelve
tribes had been explicitly and solemnly included in the
unity of Israel, largely through David himself. The
glory of David and Solomon consisted in their sovereignty
over a united people. The national recollection
of this golden age loved to dwell on the union of the
twelve tribes. The Pentateuch added legal sanction to
ancient sentiment. The twelve tribes were associated
together in national lyrics, like the <q>Blessing of Jacob</q>
and the <q>Blessing of Moses.</q> The song of Deborah
told how the northern tribes <q>came to the help of the
Lord against the mighty.</q> It was simply impossible
for the chronicler to absolutely repudiate the ten tribes;
and so they are formally included in the genealogies of
Israel, and are recognised in the history of David and
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
Solomon. Then the recognition stops. From the time
of the disruption the northern kingdom is quietly but
persistently ignored. Its prophets and sanctuaries were
as illegitimate as its kings. The great struggle of Elijah
and Elisha for the honour of Jehovah is omitted, with
all the rest of their history. Elijah is only mentioned
as sending a letter to Jehoram, king of Judah; Elisha
is never even named.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, it is more than once implied that
Judah, with the Levites, and the remnants of Simeon
and Benjamin, are the true Israel. When Rehoboam
<q>was strong he forsook the law of the Lord, and all
Israel with him.</q> After Shishak's invasion, <q>the princes
of Israel and the king humbled themselves.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xii. 1, 6.</note> The
annals of Manasseh, king of Judah, are said to be
<q>written among the acts of the kings of Israel.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxiii. 18.</note> The
register of the exiles, who returned with Zerubbabel is
headed <q>The number of the men of the people of
Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Ezra ii. 2.</note> The chronicler tacitly anticipates the position
of St. Paul: <q>They are not all Israel which are of
Israel</q>; and the Apostle might have appealed to
Chronicles to show that the majority of Israel might
fail to recognise and accept the Divine purpose for
Israel, and that the true Israel would then be found in
an elect remnant. The Jews of the second Temple
naturally and inevitably came to ignore the ten tribes and
to regard themselves as constituting this true Israel. As
a matter of history, there had been a period during which
the prophets of Samaria were of far more importance to
the religion of Jehovah than the temple at Jerusalem;
but in the chronicler's time the very existence of the
ten tribes was ancient history. Then, at any rate,
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
it was true that God's Israel was to be found in the
Jewish community, at and around Jerusalem. They
inherited the religious spirit of their fathers, and received
from them the sacred writings and traditions,
and carried on the sacred ritual. They preserved the
truth and transmitted it from generation to generation,
till at last it was merged in the mightier stream of
Christian revelation.
</p>

<p>
The attitude of the chronicler towards the prophets
of the northern kingdom does not in any way represent
the actual importance of these prophets to the religion
of Israel; but it is a very striking expression of the
fact that after the Captivity the ten tribes had long
ceased to exercise any influence upon the spiritual life
of their nation.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's attitude is also open to criticism on
another side. He is dominated by his own surroundings,
and in his references to the Judaism of his own
time there is no formal recognition of the Jewish
community in Babylon; and yet even his own casual
allusions confirm what we know from other sources,
namely that the wealth and learning of the Jews in
Babylon were an important factor in Judaism until a
very late date. This point perhaps rather concerns
Ezra and Nehemiah than Chronicles, but it is closely
connected with our present subject, and is most
naturally treated along with it. The chronicler might
have justified himself by saying that the true home of
Israel must be in Palestine, and that a community in
Babylon could only be considered as subsidiary to the
nation in its own home and worshipping at the Temple.
Such a sentiment, at any rate, would have met with
universal approval amongst Palestinian Jews. The
chronicler might also have replied that the Jews in
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
Babylon belonged to Judah and Benjamin and were
sufficiently recognised in the general prominence give
to these tribes. In all probability some Palestinian
Jews would have been willing to class their Babylonian
kinsmen with the ten tribes. Voluntary exiles from
the Temple, the Holy City, and the Land of Promise
had in great measure cut themselves off from the full
privileges of the people of Jehovah. If, however, we
had a Babylonian book of Chronicles, we should see
both Jerusalem and Babylon in another light.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler was possessed and inspired by the
actual living present round about him; he was content
to let the dead past bury its dead. He was
probably inclined to believe that the absent are mostly
wrong, and that the men who worked with him for
the Lord and His temple were the true Israel and
the Church of God. He was enthusiastic in his own
vocation and loyal to his brethren. If his interests
were somewhat narrowed by the urgency of present
circumstances, most men suffer from the same limitations.
Few Englishmen realise that the battle of
Agincourt is part of the history of the United States,
and that Canterbury Cathedral is a monument of certain
stages in the growth of the religion of New England.
We are not altogether willing to admit that these
voluntary exiles from our Holy Land belong to the
true Anglo-Saxon Israel.
</p>

<p>
Churches are still apt to ignore their obligations to
teachers who, like the prophets of Samaria, seem
to have been associated with alien or hostile branches
of the family of God. A religious movement which
fails to secure for itself a permanent monument is
usually labelled heresy. If it has neither obtained
recognition within the Church nor yet organised a sect
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
for itself, its services are forgotten or denied. Even
the orthodoxy of one generation is sometimes contemptuous
of the older orthodoxy which made it
possible; and yet Gnostics, Arians and Athanasians,
Arminians and Calvinists, have all done something to
build up the temple of faith.
</p>

<p>
The nineteenth century prides itself on a more liberal
spirit. But Romanist historians are not eager to
acknowledge the debt of their Church to the Reformers;
and there are Protestant partisans who deny that we
are the heirs of the Christian life and thought of the
mediæval Church and are anxious to trace the genealogy
of pure religion exclusively through a supposed succession
of obscure and half-mythical sects. Limitations
like those of the chronicler still narrow the sympathies
of earnest and devout Christians.
</p>

<p>
But it is time to return to the more positive aspects
of the teaching of Chronicles, and to see how far we
have already traced its exposition of the Messianic
idea. The plan of the book implies a spiritual claim
on behalf of the Jewish community of the Restoration.
Because they believed in Jehovah, whose providence
had in former times controlled the destinies of Israel,
they returned to their ancestral home that they might
serve and worship the God of their fathers. Their
faith survived the ruin of Judah and their own captivity;
they recognised the power, and wisdom, and love of God
alike in the prosperity and in the misfortunes of their
race. <q>They believed God, and it was counted unto
them for righteousness.</q> The great prophet of the
Restoration had regarded this new Israel as itself a
Messianic people, perhaps even <q>a light to the Gentiles</q>
and <q>salvation unto the ends of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xlix. 6.</note> The
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
chronicler's hopes were more modest; the new Jerusalem
had been seen by the prophet as an ideal vision;
the historian knew it by experience as an imperfect
human society: but he believed none the less in its high
spiritual vocation and prerogatives. He claimed the
future for those who were able to trace the hand of God
in their past.
</p>

<p>
Under the monarchy the fortunes of Jerusalem had
been bound up with those of the house of David.
The chronicler brings out all that was best in the
history of the ancient kings of Judah, that this ideal
picture of the state and its rulers might encourage
and inspire to future hope and effort. The character
and achievements of David and his successors were
of permanent significance. The grace and favour
accorded to them symbolised the Divine promise for
the future, and this promise was to be realised through
a Son of David.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. David&mdash;II. His Personal History.</head>

<p>
In order to understand why the chronicler entirely
recasts the graphic and candid history of David
given in the book of Samuel, we have to consider the
place that David had come to fill in Jewish religion.
It seems probable that among the sources used by the
author of the book of Samuel was a history of David,
written not long after his death, by some one familiar
with the inner life of the court. <q>No one,</q> says the
proverb, <q>is an hero to his valet</q>; very much what a
valet is to a private gentleman courtiers are to a king:
their knowledge of their master approaches to the
familiarity which breeds contempt. Not that David
was ever a subject for contempt or less than an hero
even to his own courtiers; but they knew him as a
very human hero, great in his vices as well as in his
virtues, daring in battle and wise in counsel, sometimes
also reckless in sin, yet capable of unbounded repentance,
loving not wisely, but too well. And as they
knew him, so they described him; and their picture is
an immortal possession for all students of sacred life
and literature. But it is not the portrait of a Messiah;
when we think of the <q>Son of David,</q> we do not want
to be reminded of Bath-sheba.
</p>

<p>
During the six or seven centuries that elapsed between
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
the death of David and the chronicler, the name
of David had come to have a symbolic meaning,
which was largely independent of the personal character
and career of the actual king. His reign had become
idealised by the magic of antiquity; it was a glory of
<q>the good old times.</q> His own sins and failures were
obscured by the crimes and disasters of later kings.
And yet, in spite of all its shortcomings, the <q>house of
David</q> still remained the symbol alike of ancient glory
and of future hopes. We have seen from the genealogies
how intimate the connection was between the
family and its founder. Ephraim and Benjamin may
mean either patriarchs or tribes. A Jew was not
always anxious to distinguish between the family and
the founder. <q>David</q> and <q>the house of David</q>
became almost interchangeable terms.
</p>

<p>
Even the prophets of the eighth century connect the
future destiny of Israel with David and his house.
The child, of whom Isaiah prophesied, was to sit <q>upon
the throne of David</q> and be <q>over his kingdom, to
establish it and to uphold it with judgment and with
righteousness from henceforth even for ever.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. ix. 7.</note> And,
again, the king who is to <q>sit ... in truth, ... judging,
and seeking judgment, and swift to do righteousness,</q>
is to have <q>his throne ... established in mercy in the
tent of David.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xvi. 5.</note> When Sennacherib attacked Jerusalem,
the city was defended<note place='foot'>Isa. xxxvii. 35.</note> for Jehovah's own sake
and for His servant David's sake. In the word of the
Lord that came to Isaiah for Hezekiah, David supersedes,
as it were, the sacred fathers of the Hebrew
race; Jehovah is not spoken of as <q>the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,</q> but <q>the God of David.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xxxviii. 5.</note>
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
As founder of the dynasty, he takes rank with the
founders of the race and religion of Israel: he is <q>the
patriarch David.</q><note place='foot'>Acts ii 29.</note> The northern prophet Hosea
looks forward to the time when <q>the children of Israel
shall return, and seek the Lord their God and David
their king</q><note place='foot'>Hos. iii. 5.</note>; when Amos wishes to set forth the
future prosperity of Israel, he says that the Lord <q>will
raise up the tabernacle of David</q><note place='foot'>Amos ix. 11.</note>; in Micah <q>the
ruler in Israel</q> is to come forth from Bethlehem
Ephrathah, the birthplace of David<note place='foot'>Micah v. 2.</note>; in Jeremiah
such references to David are frequent, the most
characteristic being those relating to the <q>righteous
branch, whom the Lord will raise up unto David,</q> who
<q>shall reign as king and deal wisely, and shall execute
judgment and justice in the land, in whose days Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely</q><note place='foot'>Jer. xxiii. 5, 6; cf. xxxiii. 15 and Isa. iv. 2, xi. 1. The Hebrew
word used in the last passage is different from that in the preceding.</note>; in
Ezekiel <q>My servant David</q> is to be the shepherd and
prince of Jehovah's restored and reunited people<note place='foot'>Ezek. xxxiv. 23, 24; xxxvii. 24, 25.</note>;
Zechariah, writing at what we may consider the beginning
of the chronicler's own period, follows the language
of his predecessors: he applies Jeremiah's prophecy of
<q>the righteous branch</q> to Zerubbabel, the prince of
the house of David<note place='foot'>Zech. iii. 8; the text in vi. 12 is probably corrupt.</note>: similarly in Haggai Zerubbabel
is the chosen of Jehovah<note place='foot'>Hag. ii. 23.</note>; in the appendix to Zechariah
it is said that when <q>the Lord defends the inhabitants
of Jerusalem</q> <q>the house of David shall be as God,
as the angel of the Lord before them.</q><note place='foot'>Zech. xii. 8.</note> In the later
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
literature, Biblical and apocryphal, the Davidic origin
of the Messiah is not conspicuous till it reappears in
the Psalms of Solomon<note place='foot'>Written after the death of Pompey.</note> and the New Testament, but
the idea had not necessarily been dormant meanwhile.
The chronicler and his school studied and meditated
on the sacred writings, and must have been familiar
with this doctrine of the prophets. The interest in
such a subject would not be confined to scholars.
Doubtless the downtrodden people cherished with ever-growing
ardour the glorious picture of the Davidic
king. In the synagogues it was not only Moses, but
the Prophets, that were read; and they could never
allow the picture of the Messianic king to grow faint
and pale.<note place='foot'>Schultz, <hi rend='italic'>Old Testament Theology</hi>, ii. 444.</note>
</p>

<p>
David's name was also familiar as the author of many
psalms. The inhabitants of Jerusalem would often
hear them sung at the Temple, and they were probably
used for private devotion. In this way especially the
name of David had become associated with the deepest
and purest spiritual experiences.
</p>

<p>
This brief survey shows how utterly impossible it
was for the chronicler to transfer the older narrative
bodily from the book of Samuel to his own pages.
Large omissions were absolutely necessary. He could
not sit down in cold blood to tell his readers that the
man whose name they associated with the most sacred
memories and the noblest hopes of Israel had been
guilty of treacherous murder, and had offered himself
to the Philistines as an ally against the people of
Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
From this point of view let us consider the chronicler's
omissions somewhat more in detail. In the first place,
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
with one or two slight exceptions, he omits the whole
of David's life before his accession to the throne, for
two reasons: partly because he is anxious that his
readers should think of David as king, the anointed
of Jehovah, the Messiah; partly that they may not be
reminded of his career as an outlaw and a freebooter
and of his alliance with the Philistines.<note place='foot'>An incidental reference is made to these facts in 1 Chron. xii. 19.</note> It is probably
only an unintentional result of this omission that it
enables the chronicler to ignore the important services
rendered to David by Abiathar, whose family were rivals
of the house of Zadok in the priesthood.
</p>

<p>
We have already seen that the events of David's
reign at Hebron and his struggle with Ishbosheth are
omitted because the chronicler does not recognise
Ishbosheth as a legitimate king. The omission would
also commend itself because this section contains the
account of Joab's murder of Abner and David's inability
to do more than protest against the crime. <q>I am
this day weak, though anointed king; and these men
the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me,</q><note place='foot'>2 Sam. iii. 39.</note> are scarcely
words that become an ideal king.
</p>

<p>
The next point to notice is one of those significant
alterations that mark the chronicler's industry as a
redactor. In 2 Sam. v. 21 we read that after the
Philistines had been defeated at Baal-perazim they left
their images there, and David and his men took them
away. Why did they take them away? What did
David and his men want with images? Missionaries
bring home images as trophies, and exhibit them triumphantly,
like soldiers who have captured the enemy's
standards. No one, not even an unconverted native,
supposes that they have been brought away to be used
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
in worship. But the worship of images was no improbable
apostacy on the part of an Israelite king.
The chronicler felt that these ambiguous words were
open to misconstruction; so he tells us what he
assumes to have been their ultimate fate: <q>And they
left their gods there; and David gave commandment,
and they were burnt with fire.</q><note place='foot'>2 Sam. v. 21; 1 Chron. xiv. 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
The next omission was obviously a necessary one; it is
the incident of Uriah and Bath-sheba. The name Bath-sheba
never occurs in Chronicles. When it is necessary
to mention the mother of Solomon, she is called
Bath-shua, possibly in order that the disgraceful incident
might not be suggested even by the use of the name.
The New Testament genealogies differ in this matter
in somewhat the same way as Samuel and Chronicles.
St. Matthew expressly mentions Uriah's wife as an
ancestress of our Lord, but St. Luke does not mention
her or any other ancestress.
</p>

<p>
The next omission is equally extensive and important.
It includes the whole series of events connected with
the revolt of Absalom, from the incident of Tamar to
the suppression of the rebellion of Sheba the son of
Bichri. Various motives may have contributed to this
omission. The narrative contains unedifying incidents,
which are passed over as lightly as possible by modern
writers like Stanley. It was probably a relief to the
chronicler to be able to omit them altogether. There
is no heinous sin like the murder of Uriah, but the
story leaves a general impression of great weakness on
David's part. Joab murders Amasa as he had murdered
Abner, and this time there is no record of any protest
even on the part of David. But probably the main
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
reason for the omission of this narrative is that it mars
the ideal picture of David's power and dignity and the
success and prosperity of his reign.
</p>

<p>
The touching story of Rizpah is omitted; the hanging
of her sons does not exhibit David in a very amiable
light. The Gibeonites propose that <q>they shall hang
them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, the chosen
of the Lord,</q> and David accepts the proposal. This
punishment of the children for the sin of their father
was expressly against the Law<note place='foot'>Deut. xxiv. 16, quoted in 2 Chron. xxv. 4.</note>; and the whole incident
was perilously akin to human sacrifice. How could
they be hung up before Jehovah in Gibeah unless
there was a sanctuary of Jehovah in Gibeah? And
why should Saul at such a time and in such a connection
be called emphatically <q>the chosen of Jehovah</q>?
On many grounds, it was a passage which the chronicler
would be glad to omit.
</p>

<p>
In 2 Sam. xxi. 15-17 we are told that David waxed
faint and had to be rescued by Abishai. This is omitted
by Chronicles probably because it detracts from the
character of David as the ideal hero. The next paragraph
in Samuel also tended to depreciate David's
prowess. It stated that Goliath was slain by Elhanan.
The chronicler introduces a correction. It was not
Goliath whom Elhanan slew, but Lahmi, the brother of
Goliath. However, the text in Samuel is evidently
corrupt; and possibly this is one of the cases in which
Chronicles has preserved the correct text.<note place='foot'>2 Sam. xxi. 19; 1 Chron. xx. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
Then follow two omissions that are not easily
accounted for. 2 Sam. xxii., xxiii., contain two psalms,
Psalm xviii. and <q>the Last Words of David,</q> the latter
not included in the Psalter. These psalms are generally
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
considered a late addition to the book of Samuel, and
it is barely possible that they were not in the copy
used by the chronicler; but the late date of Chronicles
makes against this supposition. The psalms may be
omitted for the sake of brevity, and yet elsewhere a
long cento of passages from post-Exilic psalms is added
to the material derived from the book of Samuel.
Possibly something in the omitted section jarred upon
the theological sensibilities of the chronicler, but it is
not clear what. He does not as a rule look below the
surface for obscure suggestions of undesirable views.
The grounds of his alterations and omissions are usually
sufficiently obvious; but these particular omissions
are not at present susceptible of any obvious explanation.
Further research into the theology of Judaism
may perhaps provide us with one hereafter.
</p>

<p>
Finally, the chronicler omits the attempt of Adonijah
to seize the throne, and David's dying commands to
Solomon. The opening chapters of the book of Kings
present a graphic and pathetic picture of the closing
scenes of David's life. The king is exhausted with old
age. His authoritative sanction to the coronation of
Solomon is only obtained when he has been roused
and directed by the promptings and suggestions of the
women of his harem. The scene is partly a parallel
and partly a contrast to the last days of Queen
Elizabeth; for when <emph>her</emph> bodily strength failed, the
obstinate Tudor spirit refused to be guided by the suggestions
of her courtiers. The chronicler was depicting
a person of almost Divine dignity, in whom incidents
of human weakness would have been out of keeping;
and therefore they are omitted.
</p>

<p>
David's charge to Solomon is equally human.
Solomon is to make up for David's weakness and
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
undue generosity by putting Joab and Shimei to death;
on the other hand, he is to pay David's debt of gratitude
to the son of Barzillai. But the chronicler felt that
David's mind in those last days must surely have been
occupied with the temple which Solomon was to build,
and the less edifying charge is omitted.
</p>

<p>
Constantine is reported to have said that, for the
honour of the Church, he would conceal the sin of a
bishop with his own imperial purple. David was more
to the chronicler than the whole Christian episcopate
to Constantine. His life of David is compiled in the
spirit and upon the principles of lives of saints generally,
and his omissions are made in perfect good
faith.
</p>

<p>
Let us now consider the positive picture of David as
it is drawn for us in Chronicles. Chronicles would be
published separately, each copy written out on a roll
of its own. There may have been Jews who had
Chronicles, but not Samuel and Kings, and who knew
nothing about David except what they learned from
Chronicles. Possibly the chronicler and his friends
would recommend the work as suitable for the education
of children and the instruction of the common people.
It would save its readers from being perplexed by the
religious difficulties suggested by Samuel and Kings.
There were many obstacles, however, to the success of
such a scheme; the persecutions of Antiochus and the
wars of the Maccabees took the leadership out of the
hands of scholars and gave it to soldiers and statesmen.
The latter perhaps felt more drawn to the real David
than to the ideal, and the new priestly dynasty would
not be anxious to emphasise the Messianic hopes of the
house of David. But let us put ourselves for a moment
in the position of a student of Hebrew history who
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
reads of David for the first time in Chronicles and has
no other source of information.
</p>

<p>
Our first impression as we read the book is that
David comes into the history as abruptly as Elijah or
Melchizedek. Jehovah slew Saul <q>and turned the
kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. x. 14.</note> Apparently
the Divine appointment is promptly and enthusiastically
accepted by the nation; all the twelve tribes come at
once in their tens and hundreds of thousands to Hebron
to make David king. They then march straight to
Jerusalem and take it by storm, and forthwith attempt
to bring up the Ark to Zion. An unfortunate accident
necessitates a delay of three months, but at the end
of that time the Ark is solemnly installed in a tent at
Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>Cf. xi. 1-9; xii. 23-xiii. 14; xv.</note>
</p>

<p>
We are not told who David the son of Jesse was,
or why the Divine choice fell upon him, or how he
had been prepared for his responsible position, or
how he had so commended himself to Israel as to be
accepted with universal acclaim. He must, however,
have been of noble family and high character; and it
is hinted that he had had a distinguished career as a
soldier.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xi. 2.</note> We should expect to find his name in the
introductory genealogies; and if we have read these
lists of names with conscientious attention, we shall
remember that there are sundry incidental references
to David, and that he was the seventh son of Jesse,<note place='foot'>1 Chron. ii. 15.</note>
who was descended from the Patriarch Judah, through
Boaz, the husband of Ruth.
</p>

<p>
As we read further we come to other references
which throw some light on David's early career, and
at the same time somewhat mar the symmetry of the
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
opening narrative. The wide discrepancy between the
chronicler's idea of David and the account given by
his authorities prevents him from composing his work
on an entirely consecutive and consistent plan. We
gather that there was a time when David was in
rebellion against his predecessor, and maintained
himself at Ziklag and elsewhere, keeping <q>himself
close, because of Saul the son of Kish,</q> and even that
he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle,
but was prevented by the jealousy of the Philistine
chiefs from actually fighting against Saul. There is
nothing to indicate the occasion or circumstances of
these events.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xii. 1, 19. There is no certain indication of the date
of the events in xi. 10-25. The fact that a <q>hold</q> is mentioned in
xi. 16, as in xii. 8, 16, is not conclusive proof that they refer to the
same period.</note> But it appears that even at this period,
when David was in arms against the king of Israel
and an ally of the Philistines, he was the chosen
leader of Israel. Men flocked to him from Judah and
Benjamin, Manasseh and Gad, and doubtless from the
other tribes as well: <q>From day to day there came to
David to help him, until it was a great host like the
host of God.</q><note place='foot'>xii. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
This chapter partly explains David's popularity after
Saul's death; but it only carries the mystery a stage
further back. How did this outlaw and apparently
unpatriotic rebel get so strong a hold on the affections
of Israel?
</p>

<p>
Chap. xii. also provides material for plausible explanations
of another difficulty. In chap. x. the army
of Israel is routed, the inhabitants of the land take
to flight, and the Philistines occupy their cities; in
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
xi. and xii. 23-40 all Israel come straightway to
Hebron in the most peaceful and unconcerned fashion
to make David king. Are we to understand that his
Philistine allies, mindful of that <q>great host, like the
host of God,</q> all at once changed their minds and
entirely relinquished the fruits of their victory?
</p>

<p>
Elsewhere, however, we find a statement that renders
other explanations possible. David reigned seven years
in Hebron,<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxix. 27.</note> so that our first impression as to the rapid
sequence of events at the beginning of his reign is
apparently not correct, and there was time in these
seven years for a more gradual expulsion of the Philistines.
It is doubtful, however, whether the chronicler
intended his original narrative to be thus modified and
interpreted.
</p>

<p>
The main thread of the history is interrupted here
and later on<note place='foot'>xi. 10-47; xx. 4-8.</note> to insert incidents which illustrate the
personal courage and prowess of David and his warriors.
We are also told how busily occupied David was during
the three months' sojourn of the Ark in the house of
Obed-edom the Gittite. He accepted an alliance with
Hiram, king of Tyre; he added to his harem; he
successfully repelled two inroads of the Philistines,
and made him houses in the city of David.<note place='foot'>xiii. 14-xvi.</note>
</p>

<p>
The narrative returns to its main subject: the history
of the sanctuary at Jerusalem. As soon as the Ark
was duly installed in its tent, and David was established
in his new palace, he was struck by the contrast between
the tent and the palace: <q>Lo, I dwell in a house of
cedar, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord dwelleth
under curtains.</q> He proposed to substitute a temple
for the tent, but was forbidden by his prophet Nathan,
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
through whom God promised him that his son should
build the Temple, and that his house should be
established for ever.<note place='foot'>xvii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Then we read of the wars, victories, and conquests
of David. He is no longer absorbed in the defence
of Israel against the Philistines. He takes the
aggressive and conquers Gath; he conquers Edom,
Moab, Ammon, and Amalek; he and his armies defeat
the Syrians in several battles, the Syrians become
tributary, and David occupies Damascus with a garrison.
<q>And the Lord gave victory to David whithersoever he
went.</q> The conquered were treated after the manner
of those barbarous times. David and his generals
carried off much spoil, especially brass, and silver, and
gold; and when he conquered Rabbah, the capital of
Ammon, <q>he brought forth the people that were therein,
and cut them with saws, and with harrows of iron, and
with axes. And thus did David unto all the cities of
the children of Ammon.</q> Meanwhile his home administration
was as honourable as his foreign wars were
glorious: <q>He executed judgment and justice unto all
his people</q>; and the government was duly organised
with commanders of the host and the bodyguard, with
priests and scribes.<note place='foot'>xviii.; xx. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
Then follows a mysterious and painful dispensation
of Providence, which the historian would gladly have
omitted, if his respect for the memory of his hero had
not been overruled by his sense of the supreme importance
of the Temple. David, like Job, was given over
for a season to Satan, and while possessed by this evil
spirit displeased God by numbering Israel. His punishment
took the form of a great pestilence, which decimated
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
his people, until, by Divine command, David erected an
altar in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite and
offered sacrifices upon it, whereupon the plague was
stayed. David at once perceived the significance of
this incident: Jehovah had indicated the site of the
future Temple. <q>This is the house of Jehovah Elohim,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, virtually Jehovah our God and the only true God.</note>
and this is the altar of burnt offering for Israel.</q><note place='foot'>For a more detailed treatment of this incident see chap. ix.</note>
</p>

<p>
This revelation of the Divine will as to the position
of the Temple led David to proceed at once with preparations
for its erection by Solomon, which occupied
all his energies for the remainder of his life.<note place='foot'>xxi.-xxix.</note> He
gathered funds and materials, and gave his son full
instructions about the building; he organised the
priests and Levites, the Temple orchestra and choir,
the doorkeepers, treasurers, officers, and judges; he
also organised the army, the tribes, and the royal
exchequer on the model of the corresponding arrangements
for the Temple.
</p>

<p>
Then follows the closing scene of David's life. The
sun of Israel sets amid the flaming glories of the
western sky. No clouds or mists rob him of accustomed
splendour. David calls a great assembly of princes
and warriors; he addresses a solemn exhortation to
them and to Solomon; he delivers to his son instructions
for <q>all the works</q> which <q>I have been made
to understand in writing from the hand of Jehovah.</q>
It is almost as though the plans of the Temple had
shared with the first tables of stone the honour of being
written with the very finger of God Himself, and
David were even greater than Moses. He reminds
Solomon of all the preparations he had made, and
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
appeals to the princes and the people for further gifts;
and they render willingly&mdash;thousands of talents of
gold, and silver, and brass, and iron. David offers
prayer and thanksgiving to the Lord: <q>And David
said to all the congregation, Now bless Jehovah our
God. And all the congregation blessed Jehovah, the
God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads,
and worshipped Jehovah <emph>and the king</emph>. And they
sacrificed sacrifices unto Jehovah, and offered burnt
offerings unto Jehovah, on the morrow after that day,
even a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, and a
thousand lambs, with their drink offerings and sacrifices
in abundance for all Israel, and did eat and drink
before Jehovah on that day with great gladness. And
they made Solomon king; ... and David died in a
good old age, full of days, riches, and honour, and
Solomon his son reigned in his stead.</q><note place='foot'>xxix. 20-22, 28.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Roman expressed his idea of a becoming death
more simply: <q>An emperor should die standing.</q> The
chronicler has given us the same view at greater length;
this is how the chronicler would have wished to die if
he had been David, and how, therefore, he conceives
that God honoured the last hours of the man after His
own heart.
</p>

<p>
It is a strange contrast to the companion picture in
the book of Kings. There the king is bedridden,
dying slowly of old age; the life-blood creeps coldly
through his veins. The quiet of the sick-room is
invaded by the shrill outcry of an aggrieved woman,
and the dying king is roused to hear that once more
eager hands are clutching at his crown. If the
chronicler has done nothing else, he has helped us
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
to appreciate better the gloom and bitterness of the
tragedy that was enacted in the last days of David.
</p>

<p>
What idea does Chronicles give us of the man and
his character? He is first and foremost a man of
earnest piety and deep spiritual feeling. Like the
great religious leaders of the chronicler's own time,
his piety found its chief expression in ritual. The
main business of his life was to provide for the sanctuary
and its services; that is, for the highest fellowship of
God and man, according to the ideas then current.
But David is no mere formalist; the psalm of thanksgiving
for the return of the Ark to Jerusalem is a worthy
tribute to the power and faithfulness of Jehovah.<note place='foot'>xvi. 8-36.</note> His
prayer after God had promised to establish his dynasty
is instinct with devout confidence and gratitude.<note place='foot'>xvii. 16-27.</note> But
the most gracious and appropriate of these Davidic
utterances is his last prayer and thanksgiving for the
liberal gifts of the people for the Temple.<note place='foot'>For a short exposition of this passage see Book. IV., Chap. i.</note>
</p>

<p>
Next to David's enthusiasm for the Temple, his most
conspicuous qualities are those of a general and soldier:
he has great personal strength and courage, and is
uniformly successful in wars against numerous and
powerful enemies; his government is both able and
upright; his great powers as an organiser and administrator
are exercised both in secular and ecclesiastical
matters; in a word, he is in more senses than one
an ideal king.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, like Alexander, Marlborough, Napoleon,
and other epoch-making conquerors, he had a great
charm of personal attractiveness; he inspired his
officers and soldiers with enthusiasm and devotion to
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
himself. The pictures of all Israel flocking to him in the
first days of his reign and even earlier, when he was an
outlaw, are forcible illustrations of this wonderful gift;
and the same feature of his character is at once illustrated
and partly explained by the romantic episode at
Adullam. What greater proof of affection could outlaws
give to their captain than to risk their lives to get him
a draught of water from the well of Bethlehem? How
better could David have accepted and ratified their
devotion than by pouring out this water as a most
precious libation to God?<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xi. 15-19.</note> But the chronicler gives
most striking expression to the idea of David's popularity
when he finally tells us in the same breath that
the people worshipped Jehovah and the king.<note place='foot'>xxix. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
In drawing an ideal picture, our author has naturally
omitted incidents that might have revealed the defects
of his hero. Such omissions deceive no one, and are
not meant to deceive any one. Yet David's failings
are not altogether absent from this history. He has
those vices which were characteristic alike of his own
age and of the chronicler's, and which indeed are not
yet wholly extinct. He could treat his prisoners with
barbarous cruelty. His pride led him to number
Israel, but his repentance was prompt and thorough;
and the incident brings out alike both his faith in God
and his care for his people. When the whole episode
is before us, it does not lessen our love and respect for
David. The reference to his alliance with the Philistines
is vague and incidental. If this were our only
account of the matter, we should interpret it by the
rest of his life, and conclude that if all the facts were
known, they would justify his conduct.
</p>

<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>

<p>
In forming a general estimate of David according to
Chronicles, we may fairly neglect these less satisfactory
episodes. Briefly David is perfect saint and perfect
king, beloved of God and man.
</p>

<p>
A portrait reveals the artist as well as the model
and the chronicler in depicting David gives indications
of the morality of his own times. We may deduce
from his omissions a certain progress in moral sensitiveness.
The book of Samuel emphatically condemns
David's treachery towards Uriah, and is conscious of
the discreditable nature of many incidents connected
with the revolts of Absalom and Adonijah; but the
silence of Chronicles implies an even severer condemnation.
In other matters, however, the chronicler
<q>judges himself in that which he approveth.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. xiv. 22.</note> Of
course the first business of an ancient king was to
protect his people from their enemies and to enrich
them at the expense of their neighbours. The urgency
of these duties may excuse, but not justify, the neglect
of the more peaceful departments of the administration.
The modern reader is struck by the little stress laid by
the narrative upon good government at home; it is
just mentioned, and that is about all. As the sentiment
of international morality is even now only in its infancy,
we cannot wonder at its absence from Chronicles; but
we are a little surprised to find that cruelty towards
prisoners is included without comment in the character
of the ideal king.<note place='foot'>2 Sam. xii. 31; 1 Chron. xx. 3.</note> It is curious that the account in the
book of Samuel is slightly ambiguous and might
possibly admit of a comparatively mild interpretation;
but Chronicles, according to the ordinary translation,
says definitely, <q>He <emph>cut</emph> them with saws.</q> The mere
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
reproduction of this passage need not imply full and
deliberate approval of its contents; but it would not
have been allowed to remain in the picture of the ideal
king, if the chronicler had felt any strong conviction as
to the duty of humanity towards one's enemies.
Unfortunately we know from the book of Esther and
elsewhere that later Judaism had not attained to any
wide enthusiasm of humanity.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. David&mdash;III. His Official Dignity.</head>

<p>
In estimating the personal character of David, we
have seen that one element of it was his ideal
kingship. Apart from his personality, his name is
significant for Old Testament theology, as that of the
typical king. From the time when the royal title
<q>Messiah</q> began to be a synonym for the hope of
Israel, down to the period when the Anglican Church
taught the Divine right of kings, and Calvinists insisted
on the Divine sovereignty or royal authority of God,
the dignity and power of the King of kings have always
been illustrated by, and sometimes associated with, the
state of an earthly monarch&mdash;whereof David is the most
striking example.
</p>

<p>
The times of the chronicler were favourable to the
development of the idea of the perfect king of Israel,
the prince of the house of David. There was no king
in Israel; and, as far as we can gather, the living representatives
of the house of David held no very prominent
position in the community. It is much easier to draw
a satisfactory picture of the ideal monarch when the
imagination is not checked and hampered by the faults
and failings of an actual Ahaz or Hezekiah. In earlier
times the prophetic hopes for the house of David had
often been rudely disappointed, but there had been
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
ample space to forget the past and to revive the old
hopes in fresh splendour and magnificence. Lack of
experience helped to commend the idea of the Davidic
king to the chronicler. Enthusiasm for a benevolent
despot is mostly confined to those who have not enjoyed
the privilege of living under such autocratic government.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, there was no temptation to flatter
any living Davidic king, so that the semi-Divine character
of the kingship of David is not set forth after the
gross and almost blasphemous style of Roman emperors
or Turkish sultans. It is indeed said that the people
worshipped Jehovah and the king; but the essential
character of Jewish thought made it impossible that
the ideal king should sit <q>in the temple of God, setting
himself forth as God.</q> David and Solomon could not
share with the pagan emperors the honours of Divine
worship in their life-time and apotheosis after their
death. Nothing addressed to any Hebrew king parallels
the panegyric to the Christian emperor Theodosius, in
which allusion is made to his <q>sacred mind,</q> and he is
told that <q>as the Fates are said to assist with their
tablets <emph>that God who is the partner in your majesty</emph>, so
does some Divine power serve your bidding, which
writes down and in due time suggests to your memory
the promises which you have made.</q><note place='foot'>Hodgkin, <hi rend='italic'>Italy and her Invaders</hi>, i. 205.</note> Nor does
Chronicles adorn the kings of Judah with extravagant
Oriental titles, such as <q>King of kings of kings of
kings.</q> Devotion to the house of David never oversteps
the bounds of a due reverence, but the Hebrew
idea of monarchy loses nothing by this salutary reserve.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, the title of the royal house of Judah rested
upon Divine appointment. <q>Jehovah ... turned the
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
kingdom unto David; ... and they anointed David
king over Israel, according to the word of Jehovah by
the hand of Samuel.</q><note place='foot'>x. 14; xi. 3.</note> But the Divine choice was
confirmed by the cordial consent of the nation; the
sovereigns of Judah, like those of England, ruled by
the grace of God and the will of the people. Even
before David's accession the Israelites had flocked to
his standard; and after the death of Saul a great array
of the twelve tribes came to Hebron to make David
king, <q>and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart
to make David king.</q><note place='foot'>xii. 38.</note> Similarly Solomon is the king
<q>whom God hath chosen,</q> and all the congregation
make him king and anoint him to be prince.<note place='foot'>xxix. 1, 22.</note> The
double election of David by Jehovah and by the nation
is clearly set forth in the book of Samuel, and in
Chronicles the omission of David's early career emphasises
this election. In the book of Samuel we are
shown the natural process that brought about the
change of dynasty; we see how the Divine choice took
effect through the wars between Saul and the Philistines
and through David's own ability and energy. Chronicles
is mostly silent as to secondary causes, and fixes
our attention on the Divine choice as the ultimate ground
for David's elevation.
</p>

<p>
The authority derived from God and the people continued
to rest on the same basis. David sought Divine
direction alike for the building of the Temple and for
his campaigns against the Philistines. At the same
time, when he wished to bring up the Ark to Jerusalem,
he <q>consulted with the captains of thousands and of
hundreds, even with every leader; and David said unto
all the assembly of Israel, If it seem good unto you,
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
and if it be of Jehovah our God, ... let us bring again
the ark of our God to us; ... and all the assembly
said that they would do so, for the thing was right in
the eyes of all the people.</q><note place='foot'>xiii. 2-4.</note> Of course the chronicler
does not intend to describe a constitutional monarchy,
in which an assembly of the people had any legal
status. Apparently in his own time the Jews exercised
their measure of local self-government through an
informal oligarchy, headed by the high-priest; and
these authorities occasionally appealed to an assembly
of the people. The administration under the monarchy
was carried on in a somewhat similar fashion, only the
king had greater authority than the high-priest, and
the oligarchy of notables were not so influential as the
colleagues of the latter. But apart from any formal
constitution the chronicler's description of these incidents
involves a recognition of the principle of popular
consent in government as well as the doctrine that civil
order rests upon a Divine sanction.
</p>

<p>
It is interesting to see how a member of a great
ecclesiastical community, imbued, as we should suppose,
with all the spirit of priestcraft, yet insists upon the
royal supremacy both in state and Church. But to
have done otherwise would have been to go in the
teeth of all history; even in the Pentateuch the <q>king
in Jeshurun</q> is greater than the priest. Moreover, the
chronicler was not a priest, but a Levite; and there are
indications that the Levites' ancient jealousy of the
priests had by no means died out. In Chronicles, at
any rate, there is no question of priests interfering
with the king's secular administration. They are not
even mentioned as obtaining oracles for David as
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
Abiathar did before his accession.<note place='foot'>1 Sam. xxiii. 9-13; xxx. 7, 8.</note> This was doubtless
implied in the original account of the Philistine raids
in chap. xiv., but the chronicler may not have understood
that <q>inquiring of God</q> meant obtaining an
oracle from the priests.
</p>

<p>
The king is equally supreme also in ecclesiastical
affairs; we might even say that the civil authorities
generally shared this supremacy. Somewhat after the
fashion of Cromwell and his major-generals, David
utilised <q>the captains of the host</q> as a kind of ministry
of public worship; they joined with him in organising
the orchestra and choir for the services of the sanctuary<note place='foot'>xxv. 1, 2.</note>:
probably Napoleon and his marshals would
have had no hesitation in selecting anthems for Notre
Dame if the idea had occurred to them. David also consulted
his captains,<note place='foot'>xiii. 1.</note> and not the priests, about bringing
the Ark to Jerusalem. When he gathered the great
assembly to make his final arrangements for the building
of the Temple, the princes and captains, the rulers
and mighty men, are mentioned, but no priests.<note place='foot'>xxviii. 1.</note> And,
last, all the congregation apparently anoint<note place='foot'>xxix. 22.</note> Zadok to
be priest. The chronicler was evidently a pronounced
Erastian.<note place='foot'>But cf. 2 Chr. xxvi.</note> David is no mere nominal head of the
Church; he takes the initiative in all important matters,
and receives the Divine commands either directly or
through his prophets Nathan and Gad. Now these
prophets are not ecclesiastical authorities; they have
nothing to do with the priesthood, and do not correspond
to the officials of an organised Church. They
are rather the domestic chaplains or confessors of the
king, differing from modern chaplains and confessors
in having no ecclesiastical superiors. They were
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
not responsible to the bishop of any diocese or the
general of any order; they did not manipulate the royal
conscience in the interests of any party in the Church;
they served God and the king, and had no other
masters. They did not beard David before his people,
as Ambrose confronted Theodosius or as Chrysostom
rated Eudoxia; they delivered their message to David
in private, and on occasion he communicated it to the
people.<note place='foot'>Cf. xvii. 4-15 and xxviii. 2-10.</note> The king's spiritual dignity is rather enhanced
than otherwise by this reception of prophetic messages
specially delivered to himself. There is another
aspect of the royal supremacy in religion. In this particular
instance its object is largely the exaltation of
David; to arrange for public worship is the most
honourable function of the ideal king. At the same
time the care of the sanctuary is his most sacred duty,
and is assigned to him that it may be punctually and
worthily discharged. State establishment of the Church
is combined with a very thorough control of the Church
by the state.
</p>

<p>
We see then that the monarchy rested on Divine
and national election, and was guided by the will of
God and of the people. Indeed, in bringing up the
Ark<note place='foot'>xiii. 1-14.</note> the consent of the people is the only recorded indication
of the will of God. <q>Vox populi vox Dei.</q> The
king and his government are supreme alike over the
state and the sanctuary, and are entrusted with the
charge of providing for public worship. Let us try to
express the modern equivalents of these principles.
Civil government is of Divine origin, and should obtain
the consent of the people; it should be carried on
according to the will of God, freely accepted by the
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
nation. The civil authority is supreme both in Church
and state, and is responsible for the maintenance of
public worship.
</p>

<p>
One at least of these principles is so widely accepted
that it is quite independent of any Scriptural sanction
from Chronicles. The consent of the people has long
been accepted as an essential condition of any stable
government. The sanctity of civil government and the
sacredness of its responsibilities are coming to be
recognised, at present perhaps rather in theory than
in practice. We have not yet fully realised how the
truth underlying the doctrine of the Divine right of
kings applies to modern conditions. Formerly the
king was the representative of the state, or even the
state itself; that is to say, the king directly or indirectly
maintained social order, and provided for the
security of life and property. The Divine appointment
and authority of the king expressed the sanctity of
law and order as the essential conditions of moral and
spiritual progress. The king is no longer the state.
His Divine right, however, belongs to him, not as
a person or as a member of a family, but as the
embodiment of the state, the champion of social order
against anarchy. The <q>Divinity that doth hedge a
king</q> is now shared by the sovereign with all the
various departments of government. The state&mdash;that
is to say, the community organised for the common
good and for mutual help&mdash;is now to be recognised as
of Divine appointment and as wielding a Divine
authority. <q>The Lord has turned the kingdom to</q>
the people.
</p>

<p>
This revolution is so tremendous that it would not
be safe to apply to the modern state the remaining
principles of the chronicler. Before we could do so
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
we should need to enter into a discussion which would
be out of place here, even if we had space for it.
</p>

<p>
In one point the new democracies agree with the
chronicler: they are not inclined to submit secular
affairs to the domination of ecclesiastical officials.
</p>

<p>
The questions of the supremacy of the state over
the Church and of the state establishment of the Church
involve larger and more complicated issues than existed
in the mind or experience of the chronicler. But his
picture of the ideal king suggests one idea that is in
harmony with some modern aspirations. In Chronicles
the king, as the representative of the state, is the
special agent in providing for the highest spiritual
needs of the people. May we venture to hope that
out of the moral consciousness of a nation united in
mutual sympathy and service there may arise a new
enthusiasm to obey and worship God? Human cruelty
is the greatest stumbling-block to belief and fellowship;
when the state has somewhat mitigated the misery of
<q>man's inhumanity to man,</q> faith in God will be
easier.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Solomon.</head>

<p>
The chronicler's history of Solomon is constructed
on the same principles as that of David, and for
similar reasons. The builder of the first Temple commanded
the grateful reverence of a community whose
national and religious life centred in the second Temple.
While the Davidic king became the symbol of the hope
of Israel, the Jews could not forget that this symbol
derived much of its significance from the widespread
dominion and royal magnificence of Solomon. The
chronicler, indeed, attributes great splendour to the
court of David, and ascribes to him a lion's share in
the Temple itself. He provided his successor with
treasure and materials and even the complete plans,
so that on the principle, <q>Qui facit per alium, facit per se,</q>
David might have been credited with the actual building.
Solomon was almost in the position of a modern
engineer who puts together a steamer that has been
built in sections. But, with all these limitations, the
clear and obvious fact remained that Solomon actually
built and dedicated the Temple. Moreover, the memory
of his wealth and grandeur kept a firm hold on the
popular imagination; and these conspicuous blessings
were received as certain tokens of the favour of
Jehovah.
</p>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<p>
Solomon's fame, however, was threefold: he was not
only the Divinely appointed builder of the Temple and,
by the same Divine grace, the richest and most powerful
king of Israel: he had also received from Jehovah the
gift of <q>wisdom and knowledge.</q> In his royal splendour
and his sacred buildings he only differed in degree
from other kings; but in his wisdom he stood alone,
not only without equal, but almost without competitor.
Herein he was under no obligation to his father, and
the glory of Solomon could not be diminished by
representing that he had been anticipated by David.
Hence the name of Solomon came to symbolise Hebrew
learning and philosophy.
</p>

<p>
In religious significance, however, Solomon cannot
rank with David. The dynasty of Judah could have
only one representative, and the founder and eponym
of the royal house was the most important figure for the
subsequent theology. The interest that later generations
felt in Solomon lay apart from the main line of
Jewish orthodoxy, and he is never mentioned by the
prophets.<note place='foot'>The casual reference in Jer. lii. 20 is only an apparent exception.
The passage is really historical, and not prophetic.</note>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the darker aspects of Solomon's reign
made more impression upon succeeding generations
than even David's sins and misfortunes. Occasional
lapses into vice and cruelty might be forgiven or even
forgotten; but the systematic oppression of Solomon
rankled for long generations in the hearts of the people,
and the prophets always remembered his wanton
idolatry. His memory was further discredited by the
disasters which marked the close of his own reign and
the beginning of Rehoboam's. Centuries later these
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
feelings still prevailed. The prophets who adapted
the Mosaic law for the closing period of the monarchy
exhort the king to take warning by Solomon, and to
multiply neither horses, nor wives, nor gold and silver.<note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 16, 17; cf. 2 Chron. i. 14-17 and 1 Kings xi. 3-8.</note>
</p>

<p>
But as time went on Judah fell into growing poverty
and distress, which came to a head in the Captivity,
and were renewed with the Restoration. The Jews
were willing to forget Solomon's faults in order that
they might indulge in fond recollections of the material
prosperity of his reign. Their experience of the culture
of Babylon led them to feel greater interest and pride
in his wisdom, and the figure of Solomon began to
assume a mysterious grandeur, which has since become
the nucleus for Jewish and Mohammedan legends.
The chief monument of his fame in Jewish literature is
the book of Proverbs, but his growing reputation is
shown by the numerous Biblical and apocryphal works
ascribed to him. His name was no doubt attached to
Canticles because of a feature in his character which
the chronicler ignores. His supposed authorship of
Ecclesiastes and of the Wisdom of Solomon testifies to
the fame of his wisdom, while the titles of the <q>Psalms
of Solomon</q> and even of some canonical psalms credit
him with spiritual feeling and poetic power.<note place='foot'>Psalms lxxii. and cxxvii. are attributed to him, the latter, however,
only in the Hebrew Bible.</note>
</p>

<p>
When the Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach proposes
to <q>praise famous men,</q> it dwells upon Solomon's
temple and his wealth, and especially upon his wisdom;
but it does not forget his failings.<note place='foot'>Ecclus. xlvii. 12-21.</note> Josephus celebrates
his glory at great length. The New Testament has
comparatively few notices of Solomon; but these include
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
references to his wisdom,<note place='foot'>Matt. xii. 42.</note> his splendour,<note place='foot'>Matt. vi. 29.</note> and his
temple.<note place='foot'>Acts vii. 47.</note> The Koran, however, far surpasses the New
Testament in its interest in Solomon; and his name
and his seal play a leading part in Jewish and Arabian
magic. The bulk of this literature is later than the
chronicler, but the renewed interest in the glory of
Solomon must have begun before his time. Perhaps,
by connecting the building of the Temple as far as
possible with David, the chronicler marks his sense of
Solomon's unworthiness. On the other hand, there
were many reasons why he should welcome the aid
of popular sentiment to enable him to include Solomon
among the ideal Hebrew kings. After all, Solomon
had built and dedicated the Temple; he was the <q>pious
founder,</q> and the beneficiaries of the foundation would
wish to make the most of his piety. <q>Jehovah</q> had
<q>magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all
Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as
had not been on any king before him in Israel.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxix. 25.</note>
<q>King Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in
riches and wisdom; and all the kings of the earth
sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom,
which God had put in his heart.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. ix. 22, 23.</note> The chronicler would
naturally wish to set forth the better side of Solomon's
character as an ideal of royal wisdom and splendour,
devoted to the service of the sanctuary. Let us briefly
compare Chronicles and Kings to see how he accomplished
his purpose.
</p>

<p>
The structure of the narrative in Kings rendered the
task comparatively easy: it could be accomplished by
removing the opening and closing sections and making
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
a few minor changes in the intermediate portion. The
opening section is the sequel to the conclusion of
David's reign; the chronicler omitted this conclusion,
and therefore also its sequel. But the contents of this
section were objectionable in themselves. Solomon's
admirers willingly forget that his reign was inaugurated
by the execution of Shimei, of his brother Adonijah,
and of his father's faithful minister Joab, and by the
deposition of the high-priest Abiathar. The chronicler
narrates with evident approval the strong measures of
Ezra and Nehemiah against foreign marriages, and he
is therefore not anxious to remind his readers that
Solomon married Pharaoh's daughter. He does not,
however, carry out his plan consistently. Elsewhere
he wishes to emphasise the sanctity of the Ark and
tells us that <q>Solomon brought up the daughter of
Pharaoh out of the city of David unto the house that
he had built for her, for he said, My wife shall not dwell
in the house of David, king of Israel, because the places
are holy whereunto the ark of the Lord hath come.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. viii. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Kings the history of Solomon closes with a long
account of his numerous wives and concubines, his
idolatry and consequent misfortunes. All this is
omitted by the chronicler; but later on, with his usual
inconsistency, he allows Nehemiah to point the moral
of a tale he has left untold: <q>Did not Solomon, king
of Israel, sin by these things?... Even him did
strange women cause to sin.</q><note place='foot'>Neh. xiii. 26.</note> In the intervening
section he omits the famous judgment of Solomon, probably
on account of the character of the women concerned.
He introduces sundry changes which naturally
follow from his belief that the Levitical law was then
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
in force.<note place='foot'>Such changes occur throughout, and need not be further noticed
unless some special interest attaches to them.</note> His feeling for the dignity of the chosen
people and their king comes out rather curiously in
two minor alterations. Both authorities agree in telling
us that Solomon had recourse to forced labour for his
building operations; in fact, after the usual Eastern
fashion from the Pyramids down to the Suez Canal,
Solomon's temple and palaces were built by the <foreign rend='italic'>corvée</foreign>.
According to the oldest narrative, he <q>raised a levy out
of all Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Kings v. 13; ix. 22, which seems to contradict this, is an
editorial note.</note> This suggests that forced labour was
exacted from the Israelites themselves, and it would help
to account for Jeroboam's successful rebellion. The
chronicler omits this statement as open to an interpretation
derogatory to the dignity of the chosen people, and
not only inserts a later explanation which he found in
the book of Kings, but also another express statement
that Solomon raised his levy of the <q>strangers that
were in the land of Israel.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. ii. 2, 17, 18; viii. 7-10.</note> These statements may
have been partly suggested by the existence of a class
of Temple slaves called Solomon's servants.
</p>

<p>
The other instance relates to Solomon's alliance with
Hiram, king of Tyre. In the book of Kings we are
told that <q>Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land
of Galilee.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings ix. 11, 12.</note> There were indeed redeeming features
connected with the transaction; the cities were not a
very valuable possession for Hiram: <q>they pleased him
not</q>; yet he <q>sent to the King six score talents of
gold.</q> However, it seemed incredible to the chronicler
that the most powerful and wealthy of the kings of
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
Israel should either cede or sell any portion of
Jehovah's inheritance. He emends the text of his
authority so as to convert it into a casual reference to
certain cities which Hiram had given to Solomon.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. viii. 1, 2, R.V.</note>
</p>

<p>
We will now reproduce the story of Solomon as
given by the chronicler. Solomon was the youngest
of four sons born to David at Jerusalem by Bath-shua,
the daughter of Ammiel. Besides these three brothers,
he had at least six other elder brothers. As in the cases
of Isaac, Jacob, Judah, and David himself, the birthright
fell to a younger son. In the prophetic utterance
which foretold his birth, he was designated to succeed
to his father's throne and to build the Temple. At the
great assembly which closed his father's reign he received
instructions as to the plans and services of the
Temple,<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxii. 9.</note> and was exhorted to discharge his duties
faithfully. He was declared king according to the
Divine choice, freely accepted by David and ratified by
popular acclamation. At David's death no one disputed
his succession to the throne: <q>All Israel obeyed him;
and all the princes and the mighty men and all the
sons likewise of King David submitted themselves unto
Solomon the king.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxix. 23, 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
His first act after his accession was to sacrifice before
the brazen altar of the ancient Tabernacle at Gibeon.
That night God appeared unto him <q>and said unto him,
Ask what I shall give thee.</q> Solomon chose wisdom
and knowledge to qualify him for the arduous task of
government. Having thus <q>sought first the kingdom of
God and His righteousness,</q> all other things&mdash;<q>riches,
wealth, and honour</q>&mdash;were added unto him.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. i. 7-13.</note>
</p>

<p>
He returned to Jerusalem, gathered a great array of
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
chariots and horses by means of traffic with Egypt,
and accumulated great wealth, so that silver, and gold,
and cedars became abundant at Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. i. 14-17.</note>
</p>

<p>
He next proceeded with the building of the Temple,
collected workmen, obtained timber from Lebanon and
an artificer from Tyre. The Temple was duly erected
and dedicated, the king taking the chief and most conspicuous
part in all the proceedings. Special reference,
however, is made to the presence of the priests and
Levites at the dedication. On this occasion the
ministry of the sanctuary was not confined to the course
whose turn it was to officiate, but <q>all the priests that
were present had sanctified themselves and did not keep
their courses; also the Levites, which were the singers,
all of them, even Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their
sons and their brethren, arrayed in fine linen, with
cymbals, and psalteries, and harps, stood at the east end
of the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty
priests sounding with trumpets.</q><note place='foot'>v. 11, 12, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>
</p>

<p>
Solomon's dedication prayer concludes with special
petitions for the priests, the saints, and the king: <q>Now
therefore arise, O Jehovah Elohim, into Thy resting-place,
Thou and the ark of Thy strength; let Thy
priests, O Jehovah Elohim, be clothed with salvation,
and let Thy saints rejoice in goodness. O Jehovah
Elohim, turn not away the face of Thine anointed;
remember the mercies of David Thy servant.</q><note place='foot'>vi. 41, 42, peculiar to Chronicles, apparently based on Psalm
cxxxii. 8-10.</note>
</p>

<p>
When David sacrificed at the threshing-floor of
Ornan the Jebusite, the place had been indicated as
the site of the future Temple by the descent of fire from
heaven; and now, in token that the mercy shown to
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
David should be continued to Solomon, the fire again
fell from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and
the sacrifices; and the glory of Jehovah <q>filled the
house of Jehovah,</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxi. 26; 2 Chron. vii. 1-3, both peculiar to Chronicles.</note> as it had done earlier in the day,
when the Ark was brought into the Temple. Solomon
concluded the opening ceremonies by a great festival:
for eight days the Feast of Tabernacles was observed
according to the Levitical law, and seven days more
were specially devoted to a dedication feast.<note place='foot'>vii. 8-10, mostly peculiar to Chronicles. The text in 1 Kings
viii. 65 has been interpolated from Chronicles.</note>
</p>

<p>
Afterwards Jehovah appeared again to Solomon, as
He had before at Gibeon, and told him that this prayer
was accepted. Taking up the several petitions that
the king had offered, He promised, <q>If I shut up
heaven that there be no rain, or if I send pestilence
among My people; if My people, which are called by
My name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek
My face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I
hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will
heal their land. Now Mine eyes shall be open, and Mine
ears attent, unto the prayer that is made in this place.</q>
Thus Jehovah, in His gracious condescension, adopts
Solomon's own words<note place='foot'>vii. 13-15, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> to express His answer to the
prayer. He allows Solomon to dictate the terms of the
agreement, and merely appends His signature and seal.
</p>

<p>
Besides the Temple, Solomon built palaces for himself
and his wife, and fortified many cities, among the rest
Hamath-zobah, formerly allied to David.<note place='foot'>viii. 3, 4, peculiar to Chronicles. Hamath is apparently referred
to as a possession of Judah in 2 Kings xiv. 28.</note> He also organised
the people for civil and military purposes.
</p>

<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>

<p>
As far as the account of his reign is concerned, the
Solomon of Chronicles appears as <q>the husband of one
wife</q>; and that wife is the daughter of Pharaoh. A
second, however, is mentioned later on as the mother
of Rehoboam; she too was a <q>strange woman,</q> an
Ammonitess, Naamah by name.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Solomon was careful to maintain all the
sacrifices and festivals ordained in the Levitical law,
and all the musical and other arrangements for the
sanctuary commanded by David, the man of God.<note place='foot'>viii. 12-16, peculiar in this form to Chronicles, but based upon
1 Kings ix. 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
We read next of his commerce by sea and land, his
great wealth and wisdom, and the romantic visit of the
queen of Sheba.<note place='foot'>ix., as in 1 Kings x. 1-13.</note>
</p>

<p>
And so the story of Solomon closes with this picture
of royal state,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><q rend='pre'>The wealth of Ormus and of Ind,</q></l>
<l>Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Wealth was combined with imperial power and
Divine wisdom. Here, as in the case of Plato's own
pupils Dionysius and Dion of Syracuse, Plato's dream
came true; the prince was a philosopher, and the
philosopher a prince.
</p>

<p>
At first sight it seems as if this marriage of authority
and wisdom had happier issue at Jerusalem than at
Syracuse. Solomon's history closes as brilliantly as
David's, and Solomon was subject to no Satanic possession
and brought no pestilence upon Israel. But
testimonials are chiefly significant in what they omit;
and when we compare the conclusions of the histories
of David and Solomon, we note suggestive differences.
</p>

<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>

<p>
Solomon's life does not close with any scene in
which his people and his heir assemble to do him
honour and to receive his last injunctions. There are
no <q>last words</q> of the wise king; and it is not said
of him that <q>he died in a good old age, full of days,
riches, and honour.</q> <q>Solomon slept with his fathers,
and he was buried in the city of David his father; and
Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead</q><note place='foot'>ix. 31.</note>: that is all.
When the chronicler, the professed panegyrist of the
house of David, brings his narrative of this great reign
to so lame and impotent a conclusion, he really implies
as severe a condemnation upon Solomon as the book
of Kings does by its narrative of his sins.
</p>

<p>
Thus the Solomon of Chronicles shows the same piety
and devotion to the Temple and its ritual which were
shown by his father. His prayer at the dedication of
the Temple is parallel to similar utterances of David.
Instead of being a general and a soldier, he is a scholar
and a philosopher. He succeeded to the administrative
abilities of his father; and his prayer displays a deep
interest in the welfare of his subjects. His record&mdash;in
Chronicles&mdash;is even more faultless than that of
David. And yet the careful student with nothing but
Chronicles, even without Ezra and Nehemiah, might
somehow get the impression that the story of Solomon,
like that of Cambuscan, had been <q>left half told.</q> In
addition to the points suggested by a comparison with
the history of David, there is a certain abruptness
about its conclusion. The last fact noted of Solomon,
before the formal statistics about <q>the rest of his acts</q>
and the years of his reign, is that horses were brought
for him <q>out of Egypt and out of all lands.</q> Elsewhere
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
the chronicler's use of his materials shows a
feeling for dramatic effect. We should not have expected
him to close the history of a great reign by a
reference to the king's trade in horses.<note place='foot'>ix. 28.</note>
</p>

<p>
Perhaps we are apt to read into Chronicles what we
know from the book of Kings; yet surely this abrupt
conclusion would have raised a suspicion that there
were omissions, that facts had been suppressed because
they could not bear the light. Upon the splendid
figure of the great king, with his wealth and wisdom,
his piety and devotion, rests the vague shadow of
unnamed sins and unrecorded misfortunes. A suggestion
of unhallowed mystery attaches itself to the
name of the builder of the Temple, and Solomon is
already on the way to become the Master of the Genii
and the chief of magicians.<note place='foot'>It is not suggested that the chronicler intended to convey this
impression, or that it would be felt by most of his readers.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Solomon (continued).</head>

<p>
When we turn to consider the spiritual significance
of this ideal picture of the history and
character of Solomon, we are confronted by a difficulty
that attends the exposition of any ideal history. An
author's ideal of kingship in the early stages of literature
is usually as much one and indivisible as his ideal
of priesthood, of the office of the prophet, and of the
wicked king. His authorities may record different
incidents in connection with each individual; but he
emphasises those which correspond with his ideal, or
even anticipates the higher criticism by constructing
incidents which seem required by the character and
circumstances of his heroes. On the other hand,
where the priest, or the prophet, or the king departs
from the ideal, the incidents are minimised or passed
over in silence. There will still be a certain variety
because different individuals may present different
elements of the ideal, and the chronicler does not
insist on each of his good kings possessing all the
characteristics of royal perfection. Still the tendency
of the process is to make all the good kings alike.
It would be monotonous to take each of them
separately and deduce the lessons taught by their
virtues, because the chronicler's intention is that
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
they shall all teach the same lessons by the same
kind of behaviour described from the same point of
view. David has a unique position, and has to be
taken by himself; but in considering the features
that must be added to the picture of David in order
to complete the picture of the good king, it is convenient
to group Solomon with the reforming kings
of Judah. We shall therefore defer for more consecutive
treatment the chronicler's account of their general
characters and careers. Here we shall merely gather
up the suggestions of the different narratives as to the
chronicler's ideal Hebrew king.
</p>

<p>
The leading points have already been indicated from
the chronicler's history of David. The first and most
indispensable feature is devotion to the temple at
Jerusalem and the ritual of the Pentateuch. This has
been abundantly illustrated from the account of Solomon.
Taking the reforming kings in their order:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Asa removed the high places which were rivals of
the Temple,<note place='foot'>xiv. 3, 5, contradicting 1 Kings xv. 14 and apparently 2 Chron.
xv. 17.</note> renewed the altar of Jehovah, gathered
the people together for a great sacrifice,<note place='foot'>xv. 8-14, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> and made
munificent donations to the Temple treasury.<note place='foot'>xv. 18, 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
Similarly Jehoshaphat took away the high places,<note place='foot'>xvii. 6 contradicts 1 Kings xxii. 43 and 2 Chron. xx. 33.</note>
and sent out a commission to teach the Law.<note place='foot'>xvii. 7-9, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>
</p>

<p>
Joash repaired the Temple<note place='foot'>xxiv. 1-14.</note>; but, curiously enough,
though Jehoram had restored the high places<note place='foot'>xxi. 11, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> and
Joash was acting under the direction of the high-priest
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
Jehoiada, it is not stated that the high places were
done away with. This is one of the chronicler's rather
numerous oversights. Perhaps, however, he expected
that so obvious a reform would be taken for granted.
</p>

<p>
Amaziah was careful to observe <q>the law in the
book of Moses</q> that <q>the children should not die for
the fathers,</q><note place='foot'>xxv. 4.</note> but Amaziah soon turned away from
following Jehovah. This is perhaps the reason why
in his case also nothing is said about doing away with
the high places.
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah had a special opportunity of showing his
devotion to the Temple and the Law. The Temple
had been polluted and closed by Ahaz, and its services
discontinued. Hezekiah purified the Temple, reinstated
the priests and Levites, and renewed the services; he
made arrangements for the payment of the Temple
revenues according to the provisions of the Levitical
law, and took away the high places. He also held a
reopening festival and a passover with numerous
sacrifices.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxviii. 24-xxxi., mostly peculiar to Chronicles; but compare
Kings xviii. 4-7, which mentions the taking away of the high
places.</note>
</p>

<p>
Manasseh's repentance is indicated by the restoration
of the Temple ritual.<note place='foot'>xxxiii. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
Josiah took away the high places, repaired the
Temple, made the people enter into a covenant to
observe the rediscovered Law, and, like Hezekiah,
held a great passover.<note place='foot'>xxxiv.; xxxv.</note>
</p>

<p>
The reforming kings, like David and Solomon, are
specially interested in the music of the Temple and in
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
all the arrangements that have to do with the porters
and doorkeepers and other classes of Levites. Their
enthusiasm for the exclusive rights of the one Temple
symbolises their loyalty to the one God, Jehovah, and
their hatred of idolatry.
</p>

<p>
Zeal for Jehovah and His temple is still combined
with uncompromising assertion of the royal supremacy
in matters of religion. The king, and not the priest, is
the highest spiritual authority in the nation. Solomon,
Hezekiah, and Josiah control the arrangements for
public worship as completely as Moses or David.
Solomon receives Divine communications without the
intervention of either priest or prophet; he himself
offers the great dedication prayer, and when he makes
an end of praying, fire comes down from heaven.
Under Hezekiah the civil authorities decide when the
passover shall be observed: <q>For the king had taken
counsel, and his princes, and all the congregation in
Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.</q><note place='foot'>xxx. 2.</note>
The great reforms of Josiah are throughout initiated
and controlled by the king. He himself goes up to the
Temple and reads in the ears of the people all the
words of the book of the covenant that was found in
the house of Jehovah. The chronicler still adheres to
the primitive idea of the theocracy, according to which
the chief, or judge, or king is the representative of
Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
The title to the crown rests throughout on the grace
of God and the will of the people. In Judah, however,
the principle of hereditary succession prevails throughout.
Athaliah is not really an exception: she reigned
as the widow of a Davidic king. The double election
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
of David by Jehovah and by Israel carried with it the
election of his dynasty. The permanent rule of the
house of David was secured by the Divine promise
to its founder. Yet the title is not allowed to rest on
mere hereditary right. Divine choice and popular
recognition are recorded in the case of Solomon and
other kings. <q>All Israel came to Shechem to make
Rehoboam king,</q> and yet revolted from him when he
refused to accept their conditions; but the obstinacy
which caused the disruption <q>was brought about of
God, that Jehovah might establish His word which He
spake by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ahaziah, Joash, Uzziah, Josiah, Jehoahaz, were all
set upon the throne by the inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>xxii. 1; xxiii. 1-15; xxvi. 1; xxxiii. 25; xxxvi. 1.</note> After Solomon the Divine appointment of
kings is not expressly mentioned; Jehovah's control
over the tenure of the throne is chiefly shown by the
removal of unworthy occupants.
</p>

<p>
It is interesting to note that the chronicler does not
hesitate to record that of the last three sovereigns of
Judah two were appointed by foreign kings: Jehoiakim
was the nominee of Pharaoh Neco, king of Egypt; and
the last king of all, Zedekiah, was appointed by
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon. In like manner,
the Herods, the last rulers of the restored kingdom of
Judah, were the nominees of the Roman emperors.
Such nominations forcibly illustrate the degradations
and ruin of the theocratic monarchy. But yet, according
to the teaching of the prophets, Pharaoh and
Nebuchadnezzar were tools in the hand of Jehovah;
and their nomination was still an indirect Divine appointment.
In the chronicler's time, however, Judah was
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
thoroughly accustomed to receive her governors from a
Persian or Greek king; and Jewish readers would not
be scandalised by a similar state of affairs in the closing
years of the earlier kingdom.
</p>

<p>
Thus the reforming kings illustrate the ideal kingship
set forth in the history of David and Solomon: the
royal authority originates in, and is controlled by, the
will of God and the consent of the people; the king's
highest duty is the maintenance of the worship of
Jehovah; but the king and people are supreme both
in Church and state.
</p>

<p>
The personal character of the good kings is also very
similar to that of David and Solomon. Jehoshaphat,
Hezekiah, and Josiah are men of spiritual feeling as
well as careful observers of correct ritual. None of the
good kings, with the exception of Joash and Josiah,
are unsuccessful in war; and good reasons are given
for the exceptions. They all display administrative
ability by their buildings, the organisation of the
Temple services and the army, and the arrangements
for the collection of the revenue, especially the dues
of the priests and Levites.
</p>

<p>
There is nothing, however, to indicate that the
personal charm of David's character was inherited by
his descendants; but when biography is made merely
a means of edification, it often loses those touches of
nature which make the whole world kin, and are
capable of exciting either admiration or disgust.
</p>

<p>
The later narrative affords another illustration of the
absence of any sentiment of humanity towards enemies.
As in the case of David, the chronicler records the
cruelty of a good king as if it were quite consistent
with loyalty to Jehovah. Before he turned away from
following Jehovah, Amariah defeated the Edomites and
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
smote ten thousand of them. Others were treated like
some of the Malagasy martyrs: <q>And other ten
thousand did the children of Judah carry away alive,
and brought them unto the top of the rock, and
cast them down from the top of the rock, that they
all were broken in pieces.</q><note place='foot'>xxv. 12.</note> In this case, however,
the chronicler is not simply reproducing Kings: he has
taken the trouble to supplement his main authority
from some other source, probably local tradition. His
insertion of this verse is another testimony to the
undying hatred of Israel for Edom.
</p>

<p>
But in one respect the reforming kings are sharply
distinguished from David and Solomon. The record
of their lives is by no means blameless, and their sins
are visited by condign chastisement. They all, with
the single exception of Jotham, come to a bad end.
Asa consulted physicians, and was punished by being
allowed to die of a painful disease.<note place='foot'>xvi. 12.</note> The last event of
Jehoshaphat's life was the ruin of the navy, which he
had built in unholy alliance with Ahaziah, king of
Israel, who did very wickedly.<note place='foot'>xx. 37.</note> Joash murdered the
prophet Zechariah, the son of the high-priest Jehoiada;
his great host was routed by a small company of
Syrians, and Joash himself was assassinated by his
servants.<note place='foot'>xxiv. 20-27.</note> Amaziah turned away from following Jehovah,
and <q>brought the gods of the children of Seir, and
set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself
before them, and burned incense unto them.</q> He was
accordingly defeated by Joash, king of Israel, and
assassinated by his own people.<note place='foot'>xxv. 14-27.</note> Uzziah insisted on
exercising the priestly function of burning incense to
Jehovah, and so died a leper.<note place='foot'>xxvi. 16-23.</note> <q>Even Hezekiah rendered
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
not again according to the benefit done unto
him, for his heart was lifted up in the business of
ambassadors of the princes of Babylon; therefore there
was wrath upon him and upon Judah and Jerusalem.
Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the
pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, so that the wrath of Jehovah came not upon
them in the days of Hezekiah.</q> But yet the last days
of Hezekiah were clouded by the thought that he was
leaving the punishment of his sin as a legacy to Judah
and the house of David.<note place='foot'>xxxii. 25-33.</note> Josiah refused to heed the
warning sent to him by God through the king of
Egypt: <q>He hearkened not unto the words of Neco
from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley
of Megiddo</q>; and so Josiah died like Ahab: he was
wounded by the archers, carried out of the battle in his
chariot, and died at Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>xxxv. 20-27.</note>
</p>

<p>
The melancholy record of the misfortunes of the
good kings in their closing years is also found in the
book of Kings. There too Asa in his old age was
diseased in his feet, Jehoshaphat's ships were wrecked,
Joash and Amaziah were assassinated, Uzziah became
a leper, Hezekiah was rebuked for his pride, and
Josiah slain at Megiddo. But, except in the case of
Hezekiah, the book of Kings says nothing about
the sins which, according to Chronicles, occasioned
these sufferings and catastrophes. The narrative in
the book of Kings carries upon the face of it the lesson
that piety is not usually rewarded with unbroken prosperity,
and that a pious career does not necessarily
ensure a happy deathbed. The significance of the
chronicler's additions will be considered elsewhere;
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
what concerns us here is his departure from the principles
he observed in dealing with the lives of David
and Solomon. They also sinned and suffered; but the
chronicler omits their sins and sufferings, especially
in the case of Solomon. Why does he pursue an
opposite course with other good kings and blacken
their characters by perpetuating the memory of sins
not mentioned in the book of Kings, instead of confining
his record to the happier incidents of their
career? Many considerations may have influenced
him. The violent deaths of Joash, Amaziah, and
Josiah could neither be ignored nor explained away.
Hezekiah's sin and repentance are closely parallel to
David's in the matter of the census. Although Asa's
disease, Jehoshaphat's alliance with Israel, and Uzziah's
leprosy might easily have been omitted, yet, if some
reformers must be allowed to remain imperfect, there
was no imperative necessity to ignore the infirmities of
the rest. The great advantage of the course pursued
by the chronicler consisted in bringing out a clearly
defined contrast between David and Solomon on the
one hand and the reforming kings on the other. The
piety of the latter is conformed to the chronicler's
ideal; but the glory and devotion of the former are
enhanced by the crimes and humiliation of the best of
their successors. Hezekiah, doubtless, is not more
culpable than David, but David's pride was the first of
a series of events which terminated in the building of
the Temple; while the uplifting of Hezekiah's heart
was a precursor of its destruction. Besides, Hezekiah
ought to have prompted by David's experience.
</p>

<p>
By developing this contrast, the chronicler renders
the position of David and Solomon even more unique,
illustrious, and full of religious significance.
</p>

<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>

<p>
Thus as illustrations of ideal kingship the accounts
of the good kings of Judah are altogether subordinate
to the history of David and Solomon. While these
kings of Judah remain loyal to Jehovah, they further
illustrate the virtues of their great predecessors by
showing how these virtues might have been exercised
under different circumstances: how David would have
dealt with an Ethiopian invasion and what Solomon
would have done if he had found the Temple desecrated
and its services stopped. But no essential feature is
added to the earlier pictures.
</p>

<p>
The lapses of kings who began to walk in the law
of the Lord and then fell away serve as foils to the
undimmed glory of David and Solomon. Abrupt
transitions within the limits of the individual lives of
Asa, Joash, and Amaziah bring out the contrast
between piety and apostacy with startling, dramatic
effect.
</p>

<p>
We return from this brief survey to consider the
significance of the life of Solomon according to Chronicles.
Its relation to the life of David is summed up
in the name Solomon, the Prince of peace. David
is the ideal king, winning by force of arms for Israel
empire and victory, security at home and tribute from
abroad. Utterly subdued by his prowess, the natural
enemies of Israel no longer venture to disturb her
tranquillity. His successor inherits wide dominion,
immense wealth, and assured peace. Solomon, the
Prince of peace, is the ideal king, administering a
great inheritance for the glory of Jehovah and His
temple. His history in Chronicles is one of unbroken
calm. He has a great army and many strong fortresses,
but he never has occasion to use them. He implores
Jehovah to be merciful to Israel when they suffer from
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
the horrors of war; but he is interceding, not for his
own subjects, but for future generations. In his
time&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>No war or battle's sound</q></l>
<l>Was heard the world around:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The idle spear and shield were high uphung;</l>
<l>The hookèd chariot stood</l>
<l>Unstained with hostile blood;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><q rend='post'>The trumpet spake not to the armèd throng.</q><note place='foot'>Milton, Hymn to the Nativity.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Perhaps, to use a paradox, the greatest proof of
Solomon's wisdom was that he asked for wisdom. He
realised at the outset of his career that a wide dominion
is more easily won than governed, that to use great
wealth honourably requires more skill and character
than are needed to amass it. To-day the world can
boast half a dozen empires surpassing not merely
Israel, but even Rome, in extent of dominion; the
aggregate wealth of the world is far beyond the wildest
dreams of the chronicler: but still the people perish
for lack of knowledge. The physical and moral foulness
of modern cities taints all the culture and tarnishes
all the splendour of our civilisation; classes and
trades, employers and employed, maim and crush one
another in blind struggles to work out a selfish
salvation; newly devised organisations move their unwieldy
masses&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>... like dragons of the prime</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>That tare each other.</q><note place='foot'>Tennyson, In Memoriam.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
They have a giant's strength, and use it like a giant.
Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers; and the world
waits for the reign of the Prince of peace who is not
only the wise king, but the incarnate wisdom of God.
</p>

<p>
Thus one striking suggestion of the chronicler's
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
history of Solomon is the special need of wisdom and
Divine guidance for the administration of a great and
prosperous empire.
</p>

<p>
Too much stress, however, must not be laid on the
twofold personality of the ideal king. This feature is
adopted from the history, and does not express any
opinion of the chronicler that the characteristic gifts of
David and Solomon could not be combined in a single
individual. Many great generals have also been
successful administrators. Before Julius Cæsar was
assassinated he had already shown his capacity to
restore order and tranquillity to the Roman world;
Alexander's plans for the civil government of his
conquests were as far-reaching as his warlike ambition;
Diocletian reorganised the empire which his sword
had re-established; Cromwell's schemes of reform
showed an almost prophetic insight into the future
needs of the English people; the glory of Napoleon's
victories is a doubtful legacy to France compared with
the solid benefits of his internal reforms.
</p>

<p>
But even these instances, which illustrate the union
of military genius and administrative ability, remind
us that the assignment of success in war to one king
and a reign of peace to the next is, after all, typical.
The limits of human life narrow its possibilities.
Cæsar's work had to be completed by Augustus; the
great schemes of Alexander and Cromwell fell to the
ground because no one arose to play Solomon to their
David.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler has specially emphasised the indebtedness
of Solomon to David. According to his
narrative, the great achievement of Solomon's reign,
the building of the Temple, has been rendered possible
by David's preparations. Quite apart from plans and
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
materials, the chronicler's view of the credit due to
David in this matter is only a reasonable recognition
of service rendered to the religion of Israel. Whoever
provided the timber and stone, the silver and gold,
for the Temple, David won for Jehovah the land and
the city that were the outer courts of the sanctuary,
and roused the national spirit that gave to Zion its
most solemn consecration. Solomon's temple was
alike the symbol of David's achievements and the
coping-stone of his work.
</p>

<p>
By compelling our attention to the dependence of
the Prince of Peace upon the man who <q>had shed
much blood,</q> the chronicler admonishes us against
forgetting the price that has been paid for liberty and
culture. The splendid courtiers whose <q>apparel</q>
specially pleased the feminine tastes of the queen of
Sheba might feel all the contempt of the superior
person for David's war-worn veterans. The latter
probably were more at home in the <q>store cities</q> than
at Jerusalem. But without the blood and toil of these
rough soldiers Solomon would have had no opportunity
to exchange riddles with his fair visitor and to dazzle her
admiring eyes with the glories of his temple and palaces.
</p>

<p>
The blessings of peace are not likely to be preserved
unless men still appreciate and cherish the stern virtues
that flourish in troubled times. If our own times become
troubled, and their serenity be invaded by fierce conflict,
it will be ours to remember that the rugged life of <q>the
hold in the wilderness</q> and the struggles with the
Philistines may enable a later generation to build its
temple to the Lord and to learn the answers to <q>hard
questions.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. ix. 1.</note> Moses and Joshua, David and Solomon,
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
remind us again how the Divine work is handed on
from generation to generation: Moses leads Israel
through the wilderness, but Joshua brings them into
the Land of Promise; David collects the materials,
but Solomon builds the Temple. The settlement in
Palestine and the building of the Temple were only
episodes in the working out of the <q>one increasing
purpose,</q> but one leader and one life-time did not suffice
for either episode. We grow impatient of the scale
upon which God works: we want it reduced to the
limits of our human faculties and of our earthly lives;
yet all history preaches patience. In our demand for
Divine interventions whereby&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'><q rend='pre'>... sudden in a minute</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>All is accomplished, and the work is done,</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
we are very Esaus, eager to sell the birthright of the
future for a mess of pottage to-day.
</p>

<p>
And the continuity of the Divine purpose is only
realised through the continuity of human effort. We
must indeed serve our own generation; but part of
that service consists in providing that the next generation
shall be trained to carry on the work, and that
after David shall come Solomon&mdash;the Solomon of
Chronicles, and not the Solomon of Kings&mdash;and that, if
possible, Solomon shall not be succeeded by Rehoboam.
As we attain this larger outlook, we shall be less
tempted to employ doubtful means, which are supposed
to be justified by their end; we shall be less enthusiastic
for processes that bring <q>quick returns,</q> but give
very <q>small profits</q> in the long run. Christian
workers are a little too fond of spiritual jerry-building,
as if sites in the kingdom of heaven were let out on
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
ninety-nine-year leases; but God builds for eternity,
and we are fellow-workers together with Him.
</p>

<p>
To complete the chronicler's picture of the ideal
king, we have to add David's warlike prowess and
Solomon's wisdom and splendour to the piety and
graces common to both. The result is unique among
the many pictures that have been drawn by historians,
philosophers, and poets. It has a value of its own,
because the chronicler's gifts in the way of history,
philosophy, and poetry were entirely subordinated to
his interest in theology; and most theologians have
only been interested in the doctrine of the king when
they could use it to gratify the vanity of a royal
patron.
</p>

<p>
The full-length portrait in Chronicles contrasts
curiously with the little vignette preserved in the book
which bears the name of Solomon. There, in the
oracle which King Lemuel's mother taught him, the
king is simply admonished to avoid strange women
and strong drink, to <q>judge righteously, and minister
judgment to the poor and needy.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. xxxi. 1-9.</note>
</p>

<p>
To pass to more modern theology, the theory of the
king that is implied in Chronicles has much in common
with Wyclif's doctrine of dominion: they both recognise
the sanctity of the royal power and its temporal
supremacy, and they both hold that obedience to God
is the condition of the continued exercise of legitimate
rule. But the priest of Lutterworth was less ecclesiastical
and more democratic than our Levite.
</p>

<p>
A more orthodox authority on the Protestant doctrine
of the king would be the Thirty-nine Articles. These,
however, deal with the subject somewhat slightly. As
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
far as they go, they are in harmony with the chronicler.
They assert the unqualified supremacy of the king,
both ecclesiastical and civil. Even <q>general councils
may not be gathered together without the commandment
and will of princes.</q><note place='foot'>Articles XXI. and XXXVII.</note> On the other hand, princes
are not to imitate Uzziah in presuming to exercise
the priestly function of offering incense: they are not
to minister God's word or sacraments.
</p>

<p>
Outside theology the ideal of the king has been
stated with greater fulness and freedom, but not many
of the pictures drawn have much in common with the
chronicler's David and Solomon. Machiavelli's prince
and Bolingbroke's patriot king belong to a different
world; moreover, their method is philosophical, and
not historical: they state a theory rather than draw
a picture. Tennyson's Arthur is, what he himself
calls him, an <q>ideal knight</q> rather than an ideal
king. Perhaps the best parallels to David are to
be found in the Cyrus of the Greek historians and
philosophers and the Alfred of English story. Alfred
indeed combines many of the features both of David
and Solomon: he secured English unity, and was
the founder of English culture and literature; he
had a keen interest in ecclesiastical affairs, great
gifts of administration, and much personal attractiveness.
Cyrus, again, specially illustrates what we may
call the posthumous fortunes of David: his name
stood for the ideal of kingship with both Greeks
and Persians, and in the <hi rend='italic'>Cyropædia</hi> his life and character
are made the basis of a picture of the ideal
king.
</p>

<p>
Many points are of course common to almost all
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
such pictures; they portray the king as a capable and
benevolent ruler and a man of high personal character.
The distinctive characteristic of Chronicles is the stress
laid on the piety of the king, his care for the honour of
God and the spiritual welfare of his subjects. If the
practical influence of this teaching has not been
altogether beneficent, it is because men have too
invariably connected spiritual profit with organisation,
and ceremonies, and forms of words, sound or
otherwise.
</p>

<p>
But to-day the doctrine of the state takes the place
of the doctrine of the king. Instead of Cyropædias we
have Utopias. We are asked sometimes to look back,
not to an ideal king, but to an ideal commonwealth, to
the age of the Antonines or to some happy century of
English history when we are told that the human race
or the English people were <q>most happy and prosperous</q>;
oftener we are invited to contemplate an
imaginary future. We may add to those already made
one or two further applications of the chronicler's
principles to the modern state. His method suggests
that the perfect society will have the virtues of our
actual life without its vices, and that the possibilities
of the future are best divined from a careful study of
the past. The devotion of his kings to the Temple
symbolises the truth that the ideal state is impossible
without recognition of a Divine presence and obedience
to a Divine will.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. The Wicked Kings. 2 Chron. xxviii., etc.</head>

<p>
The type of the wicked king is not worked out
with any fulness in Chronicles. There are
wicked kings, but no one is raised to the <q>bad
eminence</q> of an evil counterpart to David; there is
no anti-David, so to speak, no prototype of antichrist.
The story of Ahaz, for instance, is not given at the
same length and with the same wealth of detail as that
of David. The subject was not so congenial to the
kindly heart of the chronicler. He was not imbued with
the unhappy spirit of modern realism, which loves to
dwell on all that is foul and ghastly in life and character;
he lingered affectionately over his heroes, and
contented himself with brief notices of his villains. In
so doing he was largely following his main authority:
the books of Samuel and Kings. There too the stories
of David and Solomon, of Elijah and Elisha, are told
much more fully than those of Jeroboam and Ahab.
</p>

<p>
But the mention of these names reminds us that
the chronicler's limitation of his subject to the history
of Judah excludes much of the material that might
have been drawn from the earlier history for a picture
of the wicked king. If it had been part of the
chronicler's plan to tell the story of Ahab, he might
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
have been led to develop his material and moralise
upon the king's career till the narrative assumed
proportions that would have rivalled the history of
David. Over against the great scene that closed
David's life might have been set another summing
up in one dramatic moment the guilt and ruin of Ahab.
But these schismatic kings were <q>alienated from the
commonwealth of Israel and strangers from the
covenants of the promise, having no hope and without
God in the world.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. ii. 12.</note> The disobedient sons of the
house of David were still children within the home,
who might be rebuked and punished; but the Samaritan
kings, as the chronicler might style them, were outcasts,
left to the tender mercies of the dogs, and sorcerers, and
murderers that were without the Holy City, Cains without
any protecting mark upon their forehead.
</p>

<p>
Hence the wicked kings in Chronicles are of the
house of David. Therefore the chronicler has a
certain tenderness for them, partly for the sake of
their great ancestor, partly because they are kings
of Judah, partly because of the sanctity and religious
significance of the Messianic dynasty. These kings
are not Esaus, for whom there is no place of repentance.
The chronicler is happy in being able to discover
and record the conversion, as we should term it,
of some kings whose reigns began in rebellion and
apostacy. By a curious compensation, the kings who
begin well end badly, and those who begin badly end
well; they all tend to about the same average. We
read of Rehoboam<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xii. 12, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> that <q>when he humbled himself
the wrath of the Lord turned from him, that he would
not destroy him altogether; and, moreover, in Judah
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
there were good things found</q>; the wickedness of
Abijah, which is plainly set forth in the book of
Kings,<note place='foot'>1 Kings xv. 3.</note> is ignored in Chronicles; Manasseh <q>humbled
himself greatly before the God of his fathers,</q> and
turned altogether from the error of his ways<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxiii. 11-20, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>; the
unfavourable judgment on Jehoahaz recorded in the
book of Kings, <q>And he did that which was evil in
the sight of the Lord, according to all that his fathers
had done,</q><note place='foot'>2 Kings xxiii. 32.</note> is omitted in Chronicles.
</p>

<p>
There remain seven wicked kings of whom nothing
but evil is recorded: Jehoram, Ahaziah, Ahaz, Amon,
Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah. Of these we
may take Ahaz as the most typical instance. As in the
cases of David and Solomon, we will first see how the
chronicler has dealt with the material derived from the
book of Kings; then we will give his account of the
career of Ahaz; and finally, by a brief comparison of
what is told of Ahaz with the history of the other
wicked kings, we will try to construct the chronicler's
idea of the wicked king and to deduce its lessons.
</p>

<p>
The importance of the additions made by the chronicler
to the history in the book of Kings will appear
later on. In his account of the attack made upon
Ahaz by Rezin, king of Damascus, and Pekah, king of
Israel, he emphasises the incidents most discreditable
to Ahaz. The book of Kings simply states that the
two allies <q>came up to Jerusalem to war; and they
besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him</q><note place='foot'>2 Kings xvi. 5.</note>; Chronicles
dwells upon the sufferings and losses inflicted on
Judah by this invasion. The book of Kings might
have conveyed the impression that the wicked king
had been allowed to triumph over his enemies;
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
Chronicles guards against this dangerous error by
detailing the disasters that Ahaz brought upon his
country.
</p>

<p>
The book of Kings also contains an interesting
account of alterations made by Ahaz in the Temple
and its furniture. By his orders the high-priest Urijah
made a new brazen altar for the Temple after the
pattern of an altar that Ahaz had seen in Damascus.
As Chronicles narrates the closing of the Temple by
Ahaz, it naturally omits these previous alterations.
Moreover, Urijah appears in the book of Isaiah as a
friend of the prophet, and is referred to by him as a
<q>faithful witness.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. viii. 2.</note> The chronicler would not wish
to perplex his readers with the problem, How could
the high-priest, whom Isaiah trusted as a faithful
witness, become the agent of a wicked king, and construct
an altar for Jehovah after a heathen pattern?
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's story of Ahaz runs thus. This
wicked king had been preceded by three good kings:
Amaziah, Uzziah, and Jotham. Amaziah indeed had
turned away from following Jehovah at the end of
his reign, but Uzziah had been zealous for Jehovah
throughout, not wisely, but too well; and Jotham
shares with Solomon the honour of a blameless record.
Without counting Amaziah's reign, king and people
had been loyal to Jehovah for sixty or seventy years.
The court of the good kings would be the centre of
piety and devotion. Ahaz, no doubt, had been carefully
trained in obedience to the law of Jehovah, and had
grown up in the atmosphere of true religion. Possibly
he had known his grandfather Uzziah in the days of
his power and glory; but at any rate, while Ahaz was
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
a child, Uzziah was living as a leper in his <q>several
house,</q> and Ahaz must have been familiar with this
melancholy warning against presumptuous interference
with the Divine ordinances of worship.
</p>

<p>
Ahaz was twenty years old when he came to the
throne, so that he had time to profit by a complete
education, and should scarcely have found opportunity
to break away from its influence. His mother's name
is not mentioned, so that we cannot say whether, as
may have been the case with Rehoboam, some Ammonite
woman led him astray from the God of his fathers.
As far as we can learn from our author, Ahaz sinned
against light and knowledge; with every opportunity
and incentive to keep in the right path, he yet went
astray.
</p>

<p>
This is a common feature in the careers of the wicked
kings. It has often been remarked that the first great
specialist on education failed utterly in the application
of his theories to his own son. Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah,
and Josiah were the most distinguished and the most
virtuous of the reforming kings, yet Jehoshaphat was
succeeded by Jehoram, who was almost as wicked as
Ahaz; Hezekiah's son <q>Manasseh made Judah and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, so that they did
evil more than did the nations whom the Lord destroyed
before the children of Israel</q>;<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxiii. 9.</note> Josiah's son and grandsons
<q>did evil in the sight of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxvi. 5, 8, 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
Many reasons may be suggested for this too familiar
spectacle: the impious son of a godly father, the bad
successor of a good king. Heirs-apparent have always
been inclined to head an opposition to their fathers'
policy, and sometimes on their accession they have
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
reversed that policy. When the father himself has
been a zealous reformer, the interests that have been
harassed by reform are eager to encourage his successor
in a retrograde policy; and reforming zeal is often
tinged with an inconsiderate harshness that provokes
the opposition of younger and brighter spirits. But,
after all, this atavism in kings is chiefly an illustration
of the slow growth of the higher nature in man. Practically
each generation starts afresh with an unregenerate
nature of its own, and often nature is too
strong for education.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, a young king of Judah was subject to the
evil influence of his northern neighbour. Judah was
often politically subservient to Samaria, and politics and
religion have always been very intimately associated.
At the accession of Ahaz the throne of Samaria was
filled by Pekah, whose twenty years' tenure of authority
indicates ability and strength of character. It is not
difficult to understand how Ahaz was led <q>to walk
in the ways of the kings of Israel</q> and <q>to make
molten images for the Baals.</q>
</p>

<p>
Nothing is told us of the actual circumstances of
these innovations. The new reign was probably inaugurated
by the dismissal of Jotham's ministers and
the appointment of the personal favourites of the new
king. The restoration of old idolatrous cults would be
a natural advertisement of a new departure in the
government. So when the establishment of Christianity
was a novelty in the empire, and men were not
assured of its permanence, Julian's accession was
accompanied by an apostacy to paganism; and later
aspirants to the purple promised to follow his example.
But the worship of Jehovah was not at once suppressed.
He was not deposed from His throne as the
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
Divine King of Judah; He was only called upon to
share His royal authority with the Baals of the neighbouring
peoples.
</p>

<p>
But although the Temple services might still be
performed, the king was mainly interested in introducing
and observing a variety of heathen rites. The
priesthood of the Temple saw their exclusive privileges
disregarded and the rival sanctuaries of the high places
and the sacred trees taken under royal patronage.
But the king's apostacy was not confined to the milder
forms of idolatry. His weak mind was irresistibly
attracted by the morbid fascination of the cruel rites
of Moloch: <q>He burnt incense in the valley of the
son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire,
according to the abomination of the heathen, whom the
Lord cast out before the children of Israel.</q>
</p>

<p>
The king's devotions to his new gods were rudely
interrupted. The insulted majesty of Jehovah was
vindicated by two disastrous invasions. First, Ahaz
was defeated by Rezin, king of Syria, who carried
away a great multitude of captives to Damascus; the
next enemy was one of those kings of Israel in whose
idolatrous ways Ahaz had chosen to walk. The delicate
flattery implied by Ahaz becoming Pekah's proselyte
failed to conciliate that monarch. He too defeated
the Jews with great slaughter. Amongst his warriors
was a certain Zichri, whose achievements recalled the
prowess of David's mighty men: he slew Maaseiah
the king's son and Azrikam, the ruler of the house,
the Lord High Chamberlain, and Elkanah, that was
next unto the king, the Prime Minister. With these
notables, there perished in a single day a hundred and
twenty thousand Jews, all of them valiant men. Their
wives and children, to the number of two hundred
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
thousand, were carried captive to Samaria. All these
misfortunes happened to Judah <q>because they had
forsaken Jehovah, the God of their fathers.</q>
</p>

<p>
And yet Jehovah in wrath remembered mercy. The
Israelite army approached Samaria with their endless
train of miserable captives, women and children, ragged
and barefoot, some even naked, filthy and footsore with
forced marches, left hungry and thirsty after prisoners'
scanty rations. Multiply a thousandfold the scenes
depicted on Egyptian and Assyrian monuments, and
you have the picture of this great slave caravan. The
captives probably had no reason to fear the barbarities
which the Assyrians loved to inflict upon their
prisoners, but yet their prospects were sufficiently
gloomy. Before them lay a life of drudgery and
degradation in Samaria. The more wealthy might
hope to be ransomed by their friends; others, again,
might be sold to the Phœnician traders, to be carried
by them to the great slave marts of Nineveh and
Babylon or even oversea to Greece. But in a moment
all was changed. <q>There was a prophet of Jehovah,
whose name was Oded, and he went out to meet the
army and said unto them, Behold, because Jehovah,
the God of your fathers, was wroth with Judah, He
hath delivered them into your hand; and ye have slain
them in a rage which hath reached up unto heaven.
And now ye purpose to keep the children of Judah and
of Jerusalem for male and female slaves; but are there
not even with you trespasses of your own against
Jehovah your God? Now hear me therefore, and send
back the captives, for the fierce wrath of Jehovah is
upon you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile <q>the princes and all the congregation
of Samaria</q> were waiting to welcome their victorious
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
army, possibly in <q>the void place at the entering in
of the gate of Samaria.</q> Oded's words, at any rate,
had been uttered in their presence. The army did not
at once respond to the appeal; the two hundred thousand
slaves were the most valuable part of their spoil,
and they were not eager to make so great a sacrifice.
But the princes made Oded's message their own.
Four heads of the children of Ephraim are mentioned
by name as the spokesmen of the <q>congregation,</q> the
king being apparently absent on some other warlike
expedition. These four were Azariah the son of
Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah
the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai.
Possibly among the children of Ephraim who dwelt in
Jerusalem after the Return there were descendants of
these men, from whom the chronicler obtained the
particulars of this incident. The princes <q>stood up
against them that came from the war,</q> and forbade
their bringing the captives into the city. They repeated
and expanded the words of the prophet: <q>Ye purpose
that which will bring upon us a trespass against
Jehovah, to add unto our sins and to our trespass, for
our trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against
Israel.</q> The army were either convinced by the
eloquence or overawed by the authority of the prophet
and the princes: <q>They left the captives and the spoil
before all the princes and the congregation.</q> And the
four princes <q>rose up, and took the captives, and with
the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and
arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and
to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble
of them upon asses, and brought them to Jericho, the
city of palm trees, unto their brethren; then they
returned to Samaria.</q>
</p>

<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>

<p>
Apart from incidental allusions, this is the last reference
in Chronicles to the northern kingdom. The
long history of division and hostility closes with this
humane recognition of the brotherhood of Israel and
Judah. The sun, so to speak, did not go down upon
their wrath. But the king of Israel had no personal
share in this gracious act. At the first it was Jeroboam
that made Israel to sin; throughout the history the
responsibility for the continued division would specially
rest upon the kings, and at the last there is no sign of
Pekah's repentance and no prospect of his pardon.
</p>

<p>
The various incidents of the invasions of Rezin and
Pekah were alike a solemn warning and an impressive
appeal to the apostate king of Judah. He had multiplied
to himself gods of the nations round about, and yet had
been left without an ally, at the mercy of a hostile
confederation, against whom his new gods either could
not or would not defend him. The wrath of Jehovah
had brought upon Ahaz one crushing defeat after
another, and yet the only mitigation of the sufferings of
Judah had also been the work of Jehovah. The returning
captives would tell Ahaz and his princes how in
schismatic and idolatrous Samaria a prophet of Jehovah
had stood forth to secure their release and obtain for
them permission to return home. The princes and
people of Samaria had hearkened to his message, and
the two hundred thousand captives stood there as the
monument of Jehovah's compassion and of the obedient
piety of Israel. Sin was bound to bring punishment;
and yet Jehovah waited to be gracious. Wherever there
was room for mercy, He would show mercy. His wrath
and His compassion had alike been displayed before
Ahaz. Other gods could not protect their worshippers
against Him; He only could deliver and restore His
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
people. He had not even waited for Ahaz to repent
before He had given him proof of His willingness to
forgive.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxviii. 5-15, peculiar to Chronicles; cf. 2 Kings xvi. 5, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
Such Divine goodness was thrown away upon Ahaz;
there was no token of repentance, no promise of amendment;
and so Jehovah sent further judgments upon the
king and his unhappy people. The Edomites came and
smote Judah, and carried away captives; the Philistines
also invaded the cities of the lowland and of the south
of Judah, and took Beth-shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth,
Soco, Timnah, Gimzo, and their dependent villages, and
dwelt in them; and Jehovah brought Judah low because
of Ahaz. And the king hardened his heart yet more
against Jehovah, and cast away all restraint, and
trespassed sore against Jehovah. Instead of submitting
himself, he sought the aid of the kings of Assyria, only
to receive another proof of the vanity of all earthly help
so long as he remained unreconciled to Heaven.
Tilgath-pilneser, king of Assyria, welcomed this opportunity
of interfering in the affairs of Western Asia, and
saw attractive prospects of levying blackmail impartially
on his ally and his enemies. He came unto Ahaz, <q>and
distressed him, but strengthened him not.</q> These new
troubles were the occasion of fresh wickedness on the
part of the king: to pay the price of this worse than
useless intervention, he took away a portion not only
from his own treasury and from the princes, but also
from the treasury of the Temple, and gave it to the king
of Assyria.
</p>

<p>
Thus betrayed and plundered by his new ally, he
trespassed <q>yet more against Jehovah, this same king
Ahaz.</q> It is almost incredible that one man could be
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
guilty of so much sin; the chronicler is anxious that
his readers should appreciate the extraordinary wickedness
of this man, this same king Ahaz. In him the
chastening of the Lord yielded no peaceable fruit of
righteousness; he would not see that his misfortunes
were sent from the offended God of Israel. With
perverse ingenuity, he found in them an incentive to
yet further wickedness. His pantheon was not large
enough. He had omitted to worship the gods of
Damascus. These must be powerful deities, whom it
would be worth while to conciliate, because they had
enabled the kings of Syria to overrun and pillage Judah.
Therefore Ahaz sacrificed to the gods of Syria, that they
might help him. <q>But,</q> says the chronicler, <q>they were
the ruin of him and of all Israel.</q> Still Ahaz went on
consistently with his policy of comprehensive eclecticism.
He made Jerusalem a very Athens for altars, which were
set up at every street corner; he discovered yet other
gods whom it might be advisable to adore: <q>And in
every several city of Judah he made high places to burn
incense unto other gods.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hitherto Jehovah had still received some share of
the worship of this most religious king, but apparently
Ahaz came to regard Him as the least powerful of his
many supernatural allies. He attributed his misfortunes,
not to the anger, but to the helplessness, of Jehovah.
Jehovah was specially the God of Israel; if disaster
after disaster fell upon His people, He was evidently
less potent than Baal, or Moloch, or Rimmon. It was
a useless expense to maintain the worship of so impotent
a deity. Perhaps the apostate king was acting
in the blasphemous spirit of the savage who flogs his
idol when his prayers are not answered. Jehovah, he
thought, should be punished for His neglect of the interests
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
of Judah. <q>Ahaz gathered together the vessels
of the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of
the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house
of Jehovah</q>;<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxviii. 16-25, peculiar to Chronicles; cf. 2 Kings
xvi. 7-18.</note> he had filled up the measure of his
iniquities.
</p>

<p>
And thus it came to pass that in the Holy City,
<q>which Jehovah had chosen to cause His name to
dwell there,</q> almost the only deity who was not worshipped
was Jehovah. Ahaz did homage to the gods
of all the nations before whom he had been humiliated;
the royal sacrifices smoked upon a hundred altars, but
no sweet savour of burnt offering ascended to Jehovah.
The fragrance of the perpetual incense no longer filled
the holy place morning and evening; the seven lamps
of the golden candlestick were put out, and the Temple
was given up to darkness and desolation. Ahaz had
contented himself with stripping the sanctuary of its
treasures; but the building itself, though closed, suffered
no serious injury. A stranger visiting the city, and
finding it full of idols, could not fail to notice the great
pile of the Temple and to inquire what image, splendid
above all others, occupied that magnificent shrine.
Like Pompey, he would learn with surprise that it was
not the dwelling-place of any image, but the symbol
of an almighty and invisible presence. Even if the
stranger were some Moabite worshipper of Chemosh,
he would feel dismay at the wanton profanity with
which Ahaz had abjured the God of his fathers and
desecrated the temple built by his great ancestors.
The annals of Egypt and Babylon told of the misfortunes
which had befallen those monarchs who were
unfaithful to their national gods. The pious heathen
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
would anticipate disaster as the punishment of Ahaz's
apostacy.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the ministers of the Temple shared its
ruin and degradation; but they could feel the assurance
that Jehovah would yet recall His people to their
allegiance and manifest Himself once more in the
Temple. The house of Aaron and the tribe of Levi
possessed their souls in patience till the final judgment
of Jehovah should fall upon the apostate. They had not
long to wait: after a reign of only sixteen years, Ahaz
died at the early age of thirty-six. We are not told
that he died in battle or by the visitation of God. His
health may have been broken by his many misfortunes,
or by vicious practices that would naturally accompany
his manifold idolatries; but in any case his early death
would be regarded as a Divine judgment. The breath
was scarcely out of his body before his religious innovations
were swept away by a violent reaction. The
people at once passed sentence of condemnation on his
memory: <q>They brought him not into the sepulchres of
the kings of Israel.</q><note place='foot'>xxviii. 27, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> His successor inaugurated his
reign by reopening the Temple, and brought back
Judah to the obedience of Jehovah. The monuments
of the impious worship of the wicked king, his multitudinous
idols, and their ritual passed away like an evil
dream, like <q>the track of a ship in the sea or a bird
in the air.</q>
</p>

<p>
The leading features of this career are common to
most of the wicked kings and to the evil days of the
good kings <q>Walking in the ways of the kings of
Israel</q> was the great crime of Jehoshaphat and his
successors Jehoram and Ahaziah. Other kings, like
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
Manasseh, built high places and followed after the
abominations of the heathen whom Jehovah cast out
before the children of Israel. Asa's lapse into wickedness
began by plundering the Temple treasury to
purchase an alliance with a heathen king, the king
of Syria, against whose successor Ahaz in his turn
hired the king of Assyria. Amaziah adopted the gods
of Edom, as Ahaz the gods of Syria, but with less
excuse, for Amaziah had conquered Edom. Other
crimes are recorded among the evil doings of the
kings: Asa had recourse to physicians, that is,
probably to magic; Jehoram slew his brethren; Joash
murdered the son of his benefactor Jehoiada; but
the supreme sin was disloyalty to Jehovah and the
Temple, and of this sin the chronicler's brief history
of Ahaz is the most striking illustration. Ahaz is the
typical apostate: he hardens his heart alike against
the mercy of Jehovah and against His repeated judgment.
He is a very Pharaoh among the kings of
Judah. The discipline that should have led to repentance
is continually perverted to be the occasion of new
sin, and at last the apostate dies in his iniquity. The
effect of the picture is heightened by its insistence on
this one sin of apostacy; other sins are illustrated and
condemned elsewhere, but here the chronicler would
have us concentrate our attention on the rise, progress,
and ruin of the apostate. Indeed, this one sin implied
and involved all others; the man who suppressed
the worship of Jehovah, and revelled in the obscene
superstitions of heathen cults, was obviously capable
of any enormity. The chronicler is not indifferent
to morality as compared with ritual, and he sees in the
neglect of Divinely appointed ritual an indication of
a character rotten through and through. In his time
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
neglect of ritual on the part of the average man or
the average king implied neglect of religion, or rather
adherence to an alien and immoral faith.
</p>

<p>
Thus the supreme sin of the wicked kings naturally
contrasts with the highest virtue of the good kings.
The standing of both is determined by their attitude
towards Jehovah. The character of the good kings
is developed in greater detail than that of their wicked
brethren; but we should not misrepresent the chronicler's
views, if we ascribed to the wicked kings all the vices
antithetic to the virtues of his royal ideal. Nevertheless
the picture actually drawn fixes our attention
upon their impious denial of the God of Israel. Much
Church history has been written on the same principle:
Constantine is a saint because he established Christianity;
Julian is an incarnation of wickedness because
he became an apostate; we praise the orthodox Theodosius,
and blame the Arian Valens. Protestant historians
have canonised Henry VIII. and Elizabeth,
and have prefixed an unholy epithet to the name of
their kinswoman, while Romanist writers interchange
these verdicts. But underlying even such opposite
judgments there is the same valid principle, the
principle that was in the mind of the chronicler: that
the king's relation to the highest and purest truth
accessible to him, whatever that truth may be, is a
just criterion of his whole character. The historian
may err in applying the criterion, but its general
principle is none the less sound.
</p>

<p>
For the character of the wicked nation we are not
left to the general suggestions that may be derived
from the wicked king. The prophets show us that it
was by no vicarious condemnation that priests and
people shared the ruin of their sovereign. In their
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
pages the subject is treated from many points of view:
Israel and Judah, Edom and Tyre, Egypt, Assyria, and
Babylon, serve in their turn as models for the picture
of the wicked nation. In the Apocalypse the ancient
picture is adapted to new circumstances, and the City
of the Seven Hills takes the place of Babylon. Modern
prophets have further adapted the treatment of the
subject to their own times, and for the most part
to their own people. With stern and uncompromising
patriotism, Carlyle and Ruskin have sought righteousness
for England even at the expense of its reputation;
they have emphasised its sin and selfishness in order
to produce repentance and reform. For other teachers
the history of foreign peoples has furnished the picture
of the wicked nation, and the France of the Revolution
or the <q>unspeakable</q> Turk has been held up as an
example of all that is abominable in national life.
</p>

<p>
Any detailed treatment of this theme in Scripture
would need an exposition, not merely of Chronicles,
but of the whole Bible. We may, however, make one
general application of the chronicler's principle that the
wicked nation is the nation that forgets God. We
do not now measure a people's religion by the number
and magnificence of its priests and churches, or by
the amount of money devoted to the maintenance of
public worship. The most fatal symptoms of national
depravity are the absence of a healthy public opinion,
indifference to character in politics, neglect of education
as a means of developing character, and the stifling
of the spirit of brotherhood in a desperate struggle for
existence. When God is thus forgotten, and the
gracious influences of His Spirit are no longer recognised
in public and private life, a country may well
be degraded into the ranks of the wicked nations.
</p>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<p>
The perfectly general terms in which the doings and
experiences of Ahaz are described facilitate the application
of their warnings to the ordinary individual. His
royal station only appears in the form and scale of his
wickedness, which in its essence is common to him with
the humblest sinner. Every young man enters, like
Ahaz, upon a royal inheritance; character and career
are as all-important to a peasant or a shopgirl as they
are to an emperor or a queen. When a girl of seventeen
or a youth of twenty succeeds to some historic
throne, we are moved to think of the heavy burden of
responsibility laid upon inexperienced shoulders and of
the grave issues that must be determined during the
swiftly passing years of their early manhood and womanhood.
Alas, this heavy burden and these grave issues
are but the common lot. The young sovereign is happy
in the fierce light that beats upon his throne, for he is
not allowed to forget the dignity and importance of
life. History, with its stories of good and wicked kings,
has obviously been written for his instruction; if the
time be out of joint, as it mostly is, he has been born to
set it right. It is all true, yet it is equally true for
every one of his subjects. His lot is only the common
lot set upon a hill, in the full sunlight, to illustrate,
interpret, and influence lower and obscurer lives.
People take such eager interest in the doings of royal
families, their christenings, weddings, and funerals,
because therein the common experience is, as it were,
glorified into adequate dignity and importance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem</q>; but most
men and women begin to reign before they are twenty.
The history of Judah for those sixteen years was really
determined long before Ahaz was invested with crown
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
and sceptre. Men should all be educated to reign, to
respect themselves and appreciate their opportunities.
We do in some measure adopt this principle with
promising lads. Their energies are stimulated by the
prospect of making a fortune or a name, or the more
soaring imagination dreams of a seat on the woolsack
or on one of the Front Benches. Gifted girls are also
encouraged, as becomes their gifts, to achieve a brilliant
marriage or a popular novel. We need to apply the
principle more consistently and to recognise the royal
dignity of the average life and of those whom the
superior person is pleased to call commonplace people.
It may then be possible to induce the ordinary young
man to take a serious interest in his own future. The
stress laid on the sanctity and supreme value of the
individual soul has always been a vital element of
evangelical teaching; like most other evangelical truths,
it is capable of deeper meaning and wider application
than are commonly recognised in systematic theology.
</p>

<p>
We have kept our sovereign waiting too long on the
threshold of his kingdom; his courtiers and his people
are impatient to know the character and intentions of
their new master. So with every heir who succeeds to
his royal inheritance. The fortunes of millions may
depend upon the will of some young Czar or Kaiser;
the happiness of a hundred tenants or of a thousand
workmen may rest on the disposition of the youthful
inheritor of a wide estate or a huge factory; but none
the less in the poorest cottage mother and father and
friends wait with trembling anxiety to see how the boy
or girl will <q>turn out</q> when they take their destinies
into their own hands and begin to reign. Already
perhaps some tender maiden watches in hope and fear,
in mingled pride and misgiving, the rapidly unfolding
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
character of the youth to whom she has promised to
commit all the happiness of a life-time.
</p>

<p>
And to each one in turn there comes the choice of
Hercules; according to the chronicler's phrase, the
young king may either <q>do right in the eyes of Jehovah,
like David his father,</q> or he may walk <q>in the ways of
the kings of Israel, and make molten images for the
Baals.</q>
</p>

<p>
The <q>right doings of David his father</q> may point to
family traditions, which set a high standard of noble
conduct for each succeeding generation. The teaching
and influence of the pious Jotham are represented by
the example of godliness set in many a Christian home,
by the wise and loving counsel of parents and friends.
And Ahaz has many modern parallels, sons and
daughters upon whom every good influence seems spent
in vain. They are led astray into the ways of the kings
of Israel, and make molten images for the Baals. There
were several dynasties of the kings of Israel, and the
Baals were many and various; there are many tempters
who deliberately or unconsciously lay snares for souls,
and they serve different powers of evil. Israel was for
the most part more powerful, wealthy, and cultured than
Judah. When Ahaz came to the throne as a mere
youth, Pekah was apparently in the prime of life and
the zenith of power. He is no inapt symbol of what
the modern tempter at any rate desires to appear: the
showy, pretentious man of the world, who parades his
knowledge of life, and impresses the inexperienced youth
with his shrewdness and success, and makes his victim
eager to imitate him, to walk in the ways of the kings of
Israel.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the prospect of making molten images for
the Baals is an insidious temptation. Ahaz perhaps
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
found the decorous worship of the one God dull and
monotonous. Baals meant new gods and new rites,
with all the excitement of novelty and variety. Jotham
may not have realised that this youth of twenty was a
man: the heir-apparent may have been treated as a
child and left too much to the women of the harem.
Responsible activity might have saved Ahaz. The
Church needs to recognise that healthy, vigorous youth
craves interesting occupation and even excitement. If
a father wishes to send his son to the devil, he cannot
do better than make that son's life, both secular and
religious, a routine of monotonous drudgery. Then
any pinchbeck king of Israel will seem a marvel of
wit and good fellowship, and the making of molten
images a most pleasing diversion. A molten image
is something solid, permanent, and conspicuous, a standing
advertisement of the enterprise and artistic taste
of the maker; he engraves his name on the pedestal,
and is proud of the honourable distinction. Many of
our modern molten images are duly set forth in popular
works, for instance the reputation for impure life, or
hard drinking, or reckless gambling, to achieve which
some men have spent their time, and money, and toil.
Other molten images are dedicated to another class of
Baals: Mammon the respectable and Belial the polite.
</p>

<p>
The next step in the history of Ahaz is also typical
of many a rake's progress. The king of Israel, in
whose ways he has walked, turns upon him and
plunders him; the experienced man of the world
gives his pupil painful proof of his superiority, and
calls in his confederates to share the spoil. Now
surely the victim's eyes will be opened to the life he
is leading and the character of his associates. By no
means. Ahaz has been conquered by Syria, and therefore
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
he will worship the gods of Syria, and he will
have a confederate of his own in the Assyrian king.
The victim tries to master the arts by which he has
been robbed and ill-treated; he will become as unscrupulous
as his masters in wickedness. He seeks
the profit and distinction of being the accomplice of
bold and daring sinners, men as pre-eminent in evil
as Tilgath-pilneser in Western Asia; and they, like
the Assyrian king, take his money and accept his
flattery: they use him and then cast him off more
humiliated and desperate than ever. He sinks into
a prey of meaner scoundrels: the Edomites and Philistines
of fast life; and then, in his extremity, he builds
new high places and sacrifices to more new gods; he
has recourse to all the shifty expedients and sordid
superstitions of the devotees of luck and chance.
</p>

<p>
All this while he has still paid some external homage
to religion; he has observed the conventions of honour
and good breeding. There have been services, as it
were, in the temple of Jehovah. Now he begins to
feel that this deference has not met with an adequate
reward; he has been no better treated than the
flagrantly disreputable: indeed, these men have often
got the better of him. <q>It is vain to serve God; what
profit is there in keeping His charge and in walking
mournfully before the Lord of hosts? The proud are
called happy; they that work wickedness are built up:
they tempt God, and are delivered.</q> His moods vary;
and, with reckless inconsistency, he sometimes derides
religion as worthless and unmeaning, and sometimes
seeks to make God responsible for his sins and misfortunes.
At one time he says he knows all about
religion and has seen through it; he was brought up
to pious ways, and his mature judgment has shown
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
him that piety is a delusion; he will no longer countenance
its hypocrisy and cant: at another time he
complains that he has been exposed to special temptations
and has not been provided with special safeguards;
the road that leads to life has been made too
steep and narrow, and he has been allowed without
warning and remonstrance to tread <q>the primrose path
that leads to the everlasting bonfire</q>; he will cast off
altogether the dull formalities and irksome restraints
of religion; he will work wickedness with a proud heart
and a high hand. His happiness and success have
been hindered by pedantic scruples; now he will be
built up and delivered from his troubles. He gets rid
of the few surviving relics of the old honourable life.
The service of prayer and praise ceases; the lamp of
truth is put out; the incense of holy thought no longer
perfumes the soul; and the temple of the Spirit is left
empty, and dark, and desolate.
</p>

<p>
At last, in what should be the prime of manhood, the
sinner, broken-hearted, worn out in mind and body,
sinks into a dishonoured grave.
</p>

<p>
The career and fate of Ahaz may have other parallels
besides this, but it is sufficiently clear that the chronicler's
picture of the wicked king is no mere antiquarian study
of a vanished past. It lends itself with startling facility
to illustrate the fatal downward course of any man
who, entering on the royal inheritance of human life,
allies himself with the powers of darkness and finally
becomes their slave.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. The Priests.</head>

<p>
The Israelite priesthood must be held to include
the Levites. Their functions and status differed
from those of the house of Aaron in degree, and not in
kind. They formed a hereditary caste set apart for
the service of the sanctuary, and as such they shared
the revenues of the Temple with the sons of Aaron.
The priestly character of the Levites is more than once
implied in Chronicles. After the disruption, we are
told that <q>the priests and the Levites that were in all
Israel resorted to Rehoboam,</q> because <q>Jeroboam and
his sons cast them off, that they should not exercise
the priest's office unto Jehovah.</q> On an emergency,
as at Hezekiah's great feast at the reopening of the
Temple, the Levites might even discharge priestly
functions. Moreover, the chronicler seems to recognise
the priestly character of the whole tribe of Levi by
retaining in a similar connection the old phrase <q>the
priests the Levites.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xi. 13, 14, xxix. 34, xxx. 27, all peculiar to Chronicles.
In xxx. 27 the text is doubtful; many authorities have <q>the priests
and the Levites.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The relation of the Levites to the priests, the sons
of Aaron, was not that of laymen to clergy, but of
an inferior clerical order to their superiors. When
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
Charlotte Brontë has occasion to devote a chapter to
curates, she heads it <q>Levitical.</q> The Levites, again,
like deacons in the Church of England, were forbidden
to perform the most sacred ritual of Divine service.
Technically their relation to the sons of Aaron might
be compared to that of deacons to priests or of priests
to bishops. From the point of view of numbers,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, in the view given us by the chronicler of the period of the
monarchy, after the Return the priests were far more numerous than
the Levites.</note>
revenues, and social standing, the sons of Aaron might
be compared to the dignitaries of the Church: archbishops,
bishops, archdeacons, deans, and incumbents of
livings with large incomes and little work; while the
Levites would correspond to the more moderately paid
and fully occupied clergy. Thus the nature of the
distinction between the priests and the Levites shows
that they were essentially only two grades of the same
order; and this corresponds roughly to what has been
generally denoted by the term <q>priesthood.</q> Priest-hood,
however, had a more limited meaning in Israel
than in later times. In some branches of the Christian
Church, the priests exercise or claim to exercise functions
which in Israel belonged to the prophets or the
king.
</p>

<p>
Before considering the central and essential idea of
the priest as a minister of public worship, we will
notice some of his minor duties. We have seen that
the sanctity of civil government is emphasised by the
religious supremacy of the king; the same truth is also
illustrated by the fact that the priests and Levites
were sometimes the king's officers for civil affairs.
Under David, certain Levites of Hebron are spoken
of as having the oversight of all Israel, both east and
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
west of Jordan, not only <q>for all the business of
Jehovah,</q> but also <q>for the service of the king.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxvi. 30-32.</note> The
business of the law-courts was recognised by Jehoshaphat
as the judgment of Jehovah, and accordingly
amongst the judges there were priests and Levites.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xix. 4-11.</note>
Similarly the mediæval governments often found their
most efficient and trustworthy administrators in the
bishops and clergy, and were glad to reinforce their
secular authority by the sanction of the Church; and
even to-day bishops sit in Parliament: incumbents
preside over vestries, and sometimes act as county
magistrates. But the interest of religion in civil government
is most manifest in the moral influence exercised
unofficially by earnest and public-spirited ministers of
all denominations.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler refers more than once to the educational
work of the priests, and especially of the Levites.
The English version probably gives his real meaning
when it attributes to him the phrase <q>teaching priest.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xv. 3. In the older literature the phrase would bear a
more special and technical meaning.</note>
Jehoshaphat's educational commission was largely composed
of priests and Levites, and Levites are spoken of
as scribes. Jewish education was largely religious, and
naturally fell into the hands of the priesthood, just as
the learning of Egypt and Babylon was chiefly in the
hands of priests and magi. The Christian ministry
maintained the ancient traditions: the monasteries
were the homes of mediæval learning, and till recently
England and Scotland mainly owed their schools to
the Churches, and almost all schoolmasters of any
position were in holy orders&mdash;priests and Levites.
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
Under our new educational system the free choice of
the people places many ministers of religion on the
school boards.
</p>

<p>
The next characteristic of the priesthood is not so
much in accordance with Christian theory and practice.
The house of Aaron and the tribe of Levi were a
Church militant in a very literal sense. In the beginning
of their history the tribe of Levi earned the
blessing of Jehovah by the pious zeal with which they
flew to arms in His cause and executed His judgment
upon their guilty fellow-countrymen.<note place='foot'>Exod. xxxii. 26-35.</note> Later on, when
<q>Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor, and the anger of
Jehovah was kindled against Israel,</q><note place='foot'>Num. xxv. 3.</note> then stood up
Phinehas, <q>the ancestor of the house of Zadok,</q> and
executed judgment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>And so the plague was stayed,</q></l>
<l>And that was counted unto him for righteousness</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Unto all generations for evermore.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm cvi. 30, 31.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But the militant character of the priesthood was not
confined to its early history. Amongst those who
<q>came armed for war to David to Hebron to turn the
kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of
Jehovah,</q> were four thousand six hundred of the
children of Levi and three thousand seven hundred of
the house of Aaron, <q>and Zadok, a young man mighty
of valour, and twenty-two captains of his father's
house.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xii. 23-28.</note> <q>The third captain of David's army for the
third month was Benaiah the son of Jehoiada the priest.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxvii. 5; cf. however, R.V. marg.</note>
</p>

<p>
David's Hebronite overseers were all <q>mighty men
of valour.</q> When Judah went out to war, the trumpets
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
of the priests gave the signal for battle<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xiii. 12.</note>; when the
high-priest Jehoiada recovered the kingdom for Joash,
the Levites compassed the king round about, every
man with his weapons in his hand<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxiii. 7. All the passages referred to in this paragraph
are peculiar to Chronicles.</note>; when Nehemiah
rebuilt the wall of Jerusalem, <q>every one with one of
his hands wrought in the work, and with the other
held his weapon,</q><note place='foot'>Neh. iv. 17.</note> and amongst the rest the priests.
Later on, when Jehovah delivered Israel from the hand
of Antiochus Epiphanes, the priestly family of the
Maccabees, in the spirit of their ancestor Phinehas,
fought and died for the Law and the Temple. There
were priestly soldiers as well as priestly generals, for
we read how <q>at that time certain priests, desirous to
show their valour, were slain in battle, for that they
went out to fight inadvisedly.</q><note place='foot'>1 Macc. v. 67.</note> In the Jewish war the
priest Josephus was Jewish commander in Galilee.
</p>

<p>
Christianity has aroused a new sentiment with regard
to war. We believe that the servant of the Lord must
not strive in earthly battles. Arms may be lawful for
the Christian citizen, but it is felt to be unseemly that
the ministers who are the ambassadors of the Prince
of Peace should themselves be men of blood. Even in
the Middle Ages fighting prelates like Odo, Bishop of
Bayeux, were felt to be exceptional anomalies; and
the prince-bishops and electoral archbishops were often
ecclesiastics only in name. To-day the Catholic Church
in France resents the conscription of its seminarists as
an act of vindictive persecution.
</p>

<p>
And yet the growth of Christian sentiment in favour
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
of peace has not prevented the occasional combination
of the soldier and the ecclesiastic. If Islam has had
its armies of dervishes, Cyril's monks fought for orthodoxy
at Alexandria and at Constantinople with all the
ferocity of wild beasts. The Crusaders, the Templars,
the Knights of St. John, were in varying degrees
partly priests and partly soldiers. Cromwell's Ironsides,
when they were wielding carnal weapons in their
own defence or in any other good cause, were as expert
as any Levites at exhortations and psalms and prayers;
and in our own day certain generals and admirals are
fond of playing the amateur ecclesiastic. In this, as in
so much else, while we deny the form of Judaism, we
retain its spirit. Havelock and Gordon were no unworthy
successors of the Maccabees.
</p>

<p>
The characteristic function, however, of the Jewish
priesthood was their ministry in public worship, in
which they represented the people before Jehovah.
In this connection public worship does not necessarily
imply that the public were present, or that the worship
in question was the united act of a great assembly.
Such worshipping assemblies were not uncommon,
especially at the feasts; but ordinary public worship
was worship on behalf of the people, not by the people.
The priests and Levites were part of an elaborate
system of symbolic ritual. Worshippers might gather
in the Temple courts, but the Temple itself was not a
place in which public meetings for worship were held,
and the people were not admitted into it. The Temple
was Jehovah's house, and His presence there was symbolised
by the Ark. In this system of ritual the
priests and Levites represented Israel; their sacrifices
and ministrations were the acceptable offerings of the
nation to God. If the sacrifices were duly offered by
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
the priests <q>according to all that was written in the
law of Jehovah, and if the priests with trumpets and
the Levites with psalteries, and harps, and cymbals duly
ministered before the ark of Jehovah to celebrate, and
thank, and praise Jehovah, the God of Israel,</q> then
the Divine service of Israel was fully performed. The
whole people could not be regularly present at a single
sanctuary, nor would they be adequately represented
by the inhabitants of Jerusalem and casual visitors
from the rest of the country. Three times a year
the nation was fully and naturally represented by those
who came up to the feasts, but usually the priests and
Levites stood in their place.
</p>

<p>
When an assembly gathered for public worship at
a feast or any other time, the priests and Levites
expressed the devotion of the people. They performed
the sacrificial rites, they blew the trumpets and played
upon the psalteries, and harps, and cymbals, and sang
the praises of Jehovah. The people were dismissed by
the priestly blessing. When an individual offered a
sacrifice as an act of private worship, the assistance of
the priests and Levites was still necessary. At the
same time the king as well as the priesthood might
lead the people in praise and prayer, and the Temple
psalmody was not confined to the Levitical choir.
When the Ark was brought away from Kirjath-jearim,
<q>David and all Israel played before God with all their
might, even with songs, and with harps, and with
psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and
with trumpets</q>; and when at last the Ark had been
safely housed in Jerusalem, and the due sacrifices had
all been offered, David dismissed the people in priestly
fashion by blessing them in the name of Jehovah.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xiii. 8; xvi. 2.</note> At
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
the two solemn assemblies which celebrated the beginning
and the close of the great enterprise of building the
Temple, public prayer was offered, not by the priests,
but by David<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxix. 10-19.</note> and Solomon.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. vi.</note> Similarly Jehoshaphat
led the prayers of the Jews when they gathered to
seek deliverance from the invading Moabites and
Ammonites. Hezekiah at his great passover both
exhorted the people and interceded for them, and
Jehovah accepted his intercession; but on this occasion,
when the festival was over, it was not the king, but
<q>the priests the Levites,</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xx. 4-13; xxx. 6-9, 18-21, 27.</note> who <q>arose and blessed the
people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer
came up to His holy habitation, even unto heaven.</q>
In the descriptions of Hezekiah's and Josiah's festivals,
the orchestra and choir, of course, are busy with the
music and singing; otherwise the main duty of the
priests and Levites is to sacrifice. In his graphic
account of Josiah's passover, the chronicler no doubt
reproduces on a larger scale the busy scenes in which
he himself had often taken part. The king, the princes,
and the chiefs of the Levites had provided between
them thirty-seven thousand six hundred lambs and
kids and three thousand eight hundred oxen for sacrifices;
and the resources of the establishment of the
Temple were taxed to the utmost. <q>So the service
was prepared, and the priests stood in their place, and
the Levites by the courses, according to the king's
commandment. And they killed the passover, and the
priests sprinkled the blood, which they received of their
hand, and the Levites flayed the sacrifices. And they
removed the burnt offerings, that they might give them
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
according to the divisions of the fathers' houses of the
children of the people, to offer unto Jehovah, as it is
written in the law of Moses; and so they did with the
oxen. And they roasted the passover according to the
ordinance; and they boiled the holy offerings in pots,
and caldrons, and pans, and carried them quickly to all
the children of the people. And afterward they prepared
for themselves and for the priests, because the
priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering the
burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the
Levites prepared for themselves and for the priests the
sons of Aaron. And the singers were in their place,
and the porters were at their several gates; they needed
not to depart from their service, for their brethren the
Levites prepared for them. So all the service of Jehovah
was prepared the same day, to keep the passover, and
to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of Jehovah.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxv.</note>
Thus even in the accounts of great public gatherings
for worship the main duty of the priests and Levites is
to perform the sacrifices. The music and singing
naturally fall into their hands, because the necessary
training is only possible to a professional choir. Otherwise
the now symbolic portions of the service, prayer,
exhortation, and blessing, were not exclusively reserved
to ecclesiastics.
</p>

<p>
The priesthood, like the Ark, the Temple, and the
ritual, belonged essentially to the system of religious
symbolism. This was their peculiar domain, into which
no outsider might intrude. Only the Levites could
touch the Ark. When the unhappy Uzzah <q>put forth
his hand to the Ark,</q> <q>the anger of Jehovah was
kindled against him; and he smote Uzzah so that he
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
died there before God.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xiii. 10.</note> The king might offer up public
prayer; but when Uzziah ventured to go into the Temple
to burn incense upon the altar of incense, leprosy broke
forth in his forehead, and the priests thrust him out
quickly from the Temple.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxvi. 16-23.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus the symbolic and representative character of
the priesthood and ritual gave the sacrifices and other
ceremonies a value in themselves, apart alike from the
presence of worshippers and the feelings or <q>intention</q>
of the officiating minister. They were the provision
made by Israel for the expression of its prayer, its
penitence and thanksgiving. When sin had estranged
Jehovah from His people, the sons of Aaron made
atonement for Israel; they performed the Divinely
appointed ritual by which the nation made submission
to its offended King and cast itself upon His mercy.
The Jewish sacrifices had features which have survived
in the sacrifice of the Mass, and the multiplication of
sacrifices arose from motives similar to those that lead
to the offering up of many masses.
</p>

<p>
One would expect, as has happened in the Christian
Church, that the ministrants of the symbolic ritual
would annex the other acts of public worship, not
only praise, but also prayer and exhortation. Considerations
of convenience would suggest such an
amalgamation of functions; and among the priests,
while the more ambitious would see in preaching a
means of extending their authority, the more earnest
would be anxious to use their unique position to promote
the spiritual life of the people. Chronicles, however,
affords few traces of any such tendency; and the great
scene in the book of Nehemiah in which Ezra and the
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
Levites expound the Law had no connection with the
Temple and its ritual. The development of the Temple
service was checked by its exclusive privileges; it was
simply impossible that the single sanctuary should
continue to provide for all the religious wants of the
Jews, and thus supplementary and inferior places
of worship grew up to appropriate the non-ritual elements
of service. Probably even in the chronicler's
time the division of religious services between the
Temple and the synagogue had already begun, with
the result that the representative and symbolic character
of the priesthood is almost exclusively emphasised.
</p>

<p>
The representative character of the priesthood has
another aspect. Strictly the priest represented the
nation before Jehovah; but in doing so it was inevitable
that he should also in some measure represent Jehovah
to the nation. He could not be the channel of worship
offered to God without being also the channel of Divine
grace to man. From the priest the worshipper learnt
the will of God as to correct ritual, and received the
assurance that the atoning sacrifice was duly accepted.
The high-priest entered within the veil to make atonement
for Israel; he came forth as the bearer of Divine
forgiveness and renewed grace, and as he blessed the
people he spoke in the name of Jehovah. We have
been able to discern the presence of these ideas in
Chronicles, but they are not very conspicuous. The
chronicler was not a layman; he was too familiar with
priests to feel any profound reverence for them. On
the other hand, he was not himself a priest, but was
specially preoccupied with the musicians, the Levites,
and the doorkeepers; so that probably he does not
give us an adequate idea of the relative dignity of the
priests and the honour in which they were held by the
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
people. Organists and choirmasters, it is said, seldom
take an exalted view of their minister's office.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler deals more fully with a matter in
which priests and Levites were alike interested: the
revenues of the Temple. He was doubtless aware of
the bountiful provision made by the Law for his order,
and loved to hold up this liberality of kings, princes,
and people in ancient days for his contemporaries to
admire and imitate. He records again and again the
tens of thousands of sheep and oxen provided for sacrifice,
not altogether unmindful of the rich dues that must
have accrued to the priests out of all this abundance;
he tells us how Hezekiah first set the good example of
appointing <q>a portion of his substance for the burnt
offerings,</q> and then <q>commanded the people that dwelt
at Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the
Levites that they might give themselves to the law of the
Lord. And as soon as the commandment came abroad
the children of Israel gave in abundance the first-fruits
of corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase
of the field; and the tithe of all things brought they in
abundantly.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxi. 3-5.</note> These were the days of old, the ancient
years when the offering of Judah and Jerusalem was
pleasant to Jehovah; when the people neither dared
nor desired to offer on God's altar a scanty tale of
blind, lame, and sick victims; when the tithes were not
kept back, and there was meat in the house of God<note place='foot'>Mal. i. 8; iii. 4, 10.</note>;
when, as Hezekiah's high-priest testified, they could
eat and have enough and yet leave plenty.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxi. 10.</note> The
manner in which the chronicler tells the tale of ancient
abundance suggests that his days were like the days
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
of Malachi. He was no pampered ecclesiastic, revelling
in present wealth and luxury, but a man who suffered
hard times, and looked back wistfully to the happier
experiences of his predecessors.
</p>

<p>
Let us now restore the complete picture of the
chronicler's priest from his scattered references to the
subject. The priest represents the nation before
Jehovah, and in a less degree represents Jehovah to
the nation; he leads their public worship, especially at
the great festal gatherings; he teaches the people the
Law. The high character, culture, and ability of the
priests and Levites occasions their employment as
judges and in other responsible civil offices. If occasion
required, they could show themselves mighty men of
valour in their country's wars. Under pious kings,
they enjoyed ample revenues which gave them independence,
added to their importance in the eyes of
the people, and left them at leisure to devote themselves
exclusively to their sacred duties.
</p>

<p>
In considering the significance of this picture, we
can pass over without special notice the exercise by
priests and Levites of the functions of leadership in
public worship, teaching, and civil government. They
are not essential to the priesthood, but are entirely
consistent with the tenure of the priestly office, and
naturally become associated with it. Warlike prowess
was certainly no part of the priesthood; but, whatever
may be true of Christian ministers, it is difficult to
charge the priests of the Lord of hosts with inconsistency
because, like Jehovah Himself, they were
men of war<note place='foot'>Exod. xv. 3.</note> and went forth to battle in the armies of
Israel. When a nation was continually fighting for its
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
very existence, it was impossible for one tribe out
of the twelve to be non-combatant.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the representative character of the
priests, it would be out of place here to enter upon the
burning questions of sacerdotalism; but we may briefly
point out the permanent truth underlying the ancient
idea of the priesthood. The ideal spiritual life in every
Church is one of direct fellowship between God and
the believer.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Speak to Him, thou, for He hears, and spirit with spirit can meet;</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And yet a man may be truly religious and not realise
this ideal, or only realise it very imperfectly. The gift
of an intense and real spiritual life may belong to the
humblest and poorest, to men of little intellect and less
learning; but, none the less, it is not within the
immediate reach of every believer, or indeed of any
believer at every time. The descendants of Mr. Little-faith
and Mr. Ready-to-halt are amongst us still, and
there is no immediate prospect of their race becoming
extinct. Times come when we are all glad to put
ourselves under the safe conduct of Mr. Great-heart.
There are many whose prayers seem to themselves too
feebly winged to rise to the throne of grace; they are
encouraged and helped when their petitions are borne
upwards on the strong pinions of another's faith.
George Eliot has pictured the Florentines as awed
spectators of Savonarola's audiences with Heaven. To
a congregation sometimes the minister's prayers are a
sacred and solemn spectacle; his spiritual feeling is
beyond them; he intercedes for blessings they neither
desire nor understand; they miss the heavenly vision
which stirs his soul. He is not their spokesman, but
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
their priest; he has entered the holy place, bearing
with him the sins that crave forgiveness, the fears that
beg for deliverance, the hopes that yearn to be fulfilled.
Though the people may remain in the outer court, yet
they are fully assured that he has passed into the
very presence of God. They listen to him as to one
who has had actual speech with the King and received
the assurance of His goodwill towards them. When
the vanguard of the Ten Thousand first sighted the
Euxine, the cry of <q>Thalassa! Thalassa!</q> (<q>The sea!
the sea!</q>) rolled backward along the line of march;
the rearguard saw the long-hoped-for sight with the
eyes of the pioneers. Much unnecessary self-reproach
would be avoided if we accepted this as one of God's
methods of spiritual education, and understood that
we all have in a measure to experience this discipline
in humility. The priesthood of the believer is not
merely his right to enter for himself into the immediate
presence of God: it becomes his duty and privilege
to represent others. But times will also come when he
himself will need the support of a priestly intercession
in the Divine presence-chamber, when he will seek out
some one of quick sympathy and strong faith and say,
<q>Brother, pray for me.</q> Apart from any ecclesiastical
theory of the priesthood, we all recognise that there
are God-ordained priests, men and women, who can
inspire dull souls with a sense of the Divine presence
and bring to the sinful and the struggling the assurance
of Divine forgiveness and help. If one in ten among
the official priests of the historic Churches had possessed
these supreme gifts, the world would have accepted
the most extravagant sacerdotalism without a murmur.
As it is, every minister, every one who leads the
worship of a congregation, assumes for the time being
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
functions and should possess the corresponding qualifications.
In his prayers he speaks for the people; he
represents them before God; on their behalf he enters
into the Divine presence; they only enter with him, if,
as their spokesman and representative, he has grasped
their feelings and raised them to the level of Divine
fellowship. He may be an untutored labourer in his
working garments; but if he can do this, this spiritual
gift makes him a priest of God. But this Christian
priesthood is not confined to public service; as the
priest offered sacrifice for the individual Jew, so the
man of spiritual sympathies helps the individual to
draw near his Maker. <q>To pray with people</q> is a
well-known ministry of Christian service, and it involves
this priestly function of presenting another's prayers to
God. This priesthood for individuals is exercised by
many a Christian who has no gifts of public utterance.
</p>

<p>
The ancient priest held a representative position in
a symbolic ritual, a position partly independent of his
character and spiritual powers. Where symbolic ritual
is best suited for popular needs, there may be room for
a similar priesthood to-day. Otherwise the Christian
priesthood is required to represent the people not in
symbol, but in reality, to carry not the blood of dead
victims into a material Holy of holies, but living souls
into the heavenly temple.
</p>

<p>
There remains one feature of the Jewish priestly
system upon which the chronicler lays great stress:
the endowments and priestly dues. In the case of the
high-priest and the Levites, whose whole time was
devoted to sacred duties, it was obviously necessary
that those who served the altar should live by the
altar. The same principle would apply, but with much
less force, to the twenty-four courses of priests, each
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
of which in its turn officiated at the Temple. But,
apart from the needs of the priesthood, their representative
character demanded that they should be able
to maintain a certain state. They were the ambassadors
of Israel to Jehovah. Nations have always
been anxious that the equipment and suite of their
representative at a foreign court should be worthy of
their power and wealth; moreover, the splendour of an
embassy should be in proportion to the rank of the
sovereign to whom it is accredited. In former times,
when the social symbols were held of more account, a
first-rate power would have felt itself insulted if asked
to receive an envoy of inferior rank, attended by only
a meagre train. Israel, by her lavish endowment of
the priesthood, consulted her own dignity and expressed
her sense of the homage due to Jehovah. The Jews
could not express their devotion in the same way as
other nations. They had to be content with a single
sanctuary, and might not build a multitude of magnificent
temples or adorn their cities with splendid, costly
statues in honour of God. There were limits to their
expenditure upon the sacrifices and buildings of the
Temple; but the priesthood offered a large opportunity
for pious generosity. The chronicler felt that loyal
enthusiasm to Jehovah would always use this opportunity,
and that the priests might consent to accept
the distinction of wealth and splendour for the honour
alike of Israel and Jehovah. Their dignity was not
personal to themselves, but rather the livery of a self-effacing
servitude. For the honour of the Church,
Thomas à Becket kept up a great establishment, appeared
in his robes of office, and entertained a crowd
of guests with luxurious fare; while he himself wore
a hair shirt next his skin and fasted like an ascetic
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
monk. When the Jews stinted the ritual or the
ministrants of Jehovah, they were doing what they
could to put Him to open shame before the nations.
Julian's experience in the grove of Daphne at Antioch
was a striking illustration of the collapse of paganism:
the imperial champion of the ancient gods must have
felt his heart sink within him when he was welcomed
to that once splendid sanctuary by one shabby priest
dragging a solitary and reluctant goose to the deserted
altar. Similarly Malachi saw that Israel's devotion to
Jehovah was in danger of dying out when men chose
the refuse of their flocks and herds and offered them
grudgingly at the shrine.
</p>

<p>
The application of these principles leads directly to
the question of a paid ministry; but the connection is
not so close as it appears at first sight, nor are we
yet in possession of all the data which the chronicler
furnishes for its discussion. Priestly duties form an
essential, but not predominant, part of the work of most
Christian ministers. Still the loyal believer must
always be anxious that the buildings, the services, and
the men which, for himself and for the world, represent
his devotion to Christ, should be worthy of their high
calling. But his ideas of the symbolism suitable for
spiritual realities are not altogether those of the
chronicler: he is less concerned with number, size,
and weight, with tens of thousands of sheep and oxen,
vast quantities of stone and timber, brass and iron,
and innumerable talents of gold and silver. Moreover,
in this special connection the secondary priestly function
of representing God to man has been expressly
transferred by Christ to the least of His brethren.
Those who wish to honour God with their substance
in the person of His earthly representatives are enjoined
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
to seek for them in hospitals, and workhouses, and
prisons, to find these representatives in the hungry,
the thirsty, the friendless, the naked, the captives. No
doubt Christ is dishonoured when those who dwell in
<q>houses of cedar</q> are content to worship Him in a
mean, dirty church, with a half-starved minister; but
the most disgraceful proof of the Church's disloyalty
to Christ is to be seen in the squalor and misery of
men, and women, and children whose bodies were
ordained of God to be the temples of His Holy Spirit.
</p>

<p>
This is only one among many illustrations of the
truth that in Christ the symbolism of religion took a
new departure. His Church enjoys the spiritual realities
prefigured by the Jewish temple and its ministry.
Even where Christian symbols are parallel to those
of Judaism, they are less conventional and richer in
their direct spiritual suggestiveness.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chapter_IX'/>
<head>Chapter IX. The Prophets.</head>

<p>
One remarkable feature of Chronicles as compared
with the book of Kings is the greater interest
shown by the former in the prophets of Judah. The
chronicler, by confining his attention to the southern
kingdom, was compelled to omit almost all reference
to Elijah and Elisha, and thus exclude from his work
some of the most thrilling chapters in the history of
the prophets of Israel. Nevertheless the prophets as
a whole play almost as important a part in Chronicles
as in the book of Kings. Compensation is made for
the omission of the two great northern prophets by
inserting accounts of several prophets whose messages
were addressed to the kings of Judah.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's interest in the prophets was very
different from the interest he took in the priests and
Levites. The latter belonged to the institutions of his
own time, and formed his own immediate circle. In
dealing with their past, he was reconstructing the
history of his own order; he was able to illustrate
and supplement from observation and experience the
information afforded by his sources.
</p>

<p>
But when the chronicler wrote, prophets had ceased
to be a living institution in Judah. The light that had
shone so brightly in Isaiah and Jeremiah burned feebly
in Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, and then went out.
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
Not long after the chronicler's time the failure of
prophecy is expressly recognised. The people whose
synagogues have been burnt up complain,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We see not our signs;</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>There is no more any prophet.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm lxxiv. 8, 9. This psalm is commonly regarded as
Maccabæan, but may be as early as the chronicler or even earlier.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
When Judas Maccabæus appointed certain priests to
cleanse the Temple after its pollution by the Syrians,
they pulled down the altar of burnt offerings because
the heathen had defiled it, and laid up the stones in
the mountain of the Temple in a convenient place, until
there should come a prophet to show what should be
done with them.<note place='foot'>1 Macc. iv. 46.</note> This failure of prophecy was not
merely brief and transient. It marked the disappearance
of the ancient order of prophets. A parallel case shows
how the Jews had become aware that the high-priest
no longer possessed the special gifts connected with the
Urim and Thummim. When certain priests could not
find their genealogies, they were forbidden <q>to eat
of the most holy things till there stood up a priest
with Urim and with Thummim.</q><note place='foot'>Ezra ii. 63.</note> We have no record
of any subsequent appearance of <q>a priest with Urim
and with Thummim</q> or of any prophet of the old
order.
</p>

<p>
Thus the chronicler had never seen a prophet; his
conception of the personality and office of the prophet
was entirely based upon ancient literature, and he took
no professional interest in the order. At the same time
he had no prejudice against them; they had no living
successors to compete for influence and endowments
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
with the priests and Levites. Possibly the Levites, as
the chief religious teachers of the people, claimed some
sort of apostolic succession from the prophets; but
there are very slight grounds for any such theory.
The chronicler's information on the whole subject was
that of a scholar with a taste for antiquarian research.
</p>

<p>
Let us briefly examine the part played by the
prophets in the history of Judah as given by Chronicles.
We have first, as in the book of Kings, the references
to Nathan and Gad: they make known to David the
will of Jehovah as regards the building of the Temple
and the punishment of David's pride in taking the
census of Israel. David unhesitatingly accepts their
messages as the word of Jehovah. It is important to
notice that when Nathan is consulted about building
the Temple he first answers, apparently giving a mere
private opinion, <q>Do all that is in thine heart, for God
is with thee</q>; but when <q>the word of God comes</q>
to him, he retracts his former judgment and forbids
David to build the Temple. Here again the plan of
the chronicler's work leads to an important omission:
his silence as to the murder of Uriah prevents him
from giving the beautiful and instructive account of
the way in which Nathan rebuked the guilty king.
Later narratives exhibit other prophets in the act of
rebuking most of the kings of Judah, but none of these
incidents are equally striking and pathetic. At the
end of the histories of David and of most of the later
kings we find notes which apparently indicate that, in
the chronicler's time, the prophets were credited with
having written the annals of the kings with whom they
were contemporary. In connection with Hezekiah's
reformation we are incidentally told that Nathan and
Gad were associated with David in making arrangements
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
for the music of the Temple: <q>He set the
Levites in the house of Jehovah, with cymbals, with
psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment
of David and of Gad the king's seer and Nathan
the prophet, for the commandment was of Jehovah by
His prophets.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxix. 25, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the account of Solomon's reign, the chronicler
omits the interview of Ahijah the Shilonite with
Jeroboam, but refers to it in the history of Rehoboam.
From this point, in accordance with his general plan, he
omits almost all missions of prophets to the northern
kings.
</p>

<p>
In Rehoboam's reign, we have recorded, as in the
book of Kings, a message from Jehovah by Shemaiah
forbidding the king and his two tribes of Judah and
Benjamin to attempt to compel the northern tribes to
return to their allegiance to the house of David.
Later on, when Shishak invaded Judah, Shemaiah was
commissioned to deliver to the king and princes the
message, <q>Thus saith Jehovah: Ye have forsaken Me;
therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xii. 5-8, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>
But when they repented and humbled themselves
before Jehovah, Shemaiah announced to them the
mitigation of their punishment.
</p>

<p>
Asa's reformation was due to the inspired exhortations
of a prophet called both Oded and Azariah the son
of Oded. Later on Hanani the seer rebuked the king
for his alliance with Benhadad, king of Syria. <q>Then
Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in the
prison-house; for he was in a rage with him because
of this thing.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xv.-xvi. 10, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>
</p>

<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>

<p>
Jehoshaphat's alliance with Ahab and his consequent
visit to Samaria enabled the chronicler to introduce
from the book of Kings the striking narrative of
Micaiah the son of Imlah; but this alliance with Israel
earned for the king the rebukes of Jehu the son of
Hanani the seer and Eliezar the son of Dodavahu of
Mareshah. However, on the occasion of the Moabite
and Ammonite invasion Jehoshaphat and his people
received the promise of Divine deliverance from
<q>Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the
son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah the Levite, of the
sons of Asaph.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xix. 2, 3, xx. 14-18, 37, all peculiar to Chronicles.</note>
</p>

<p>
The punishment of the wicked king Jehoram was
announced to him by a <q>writing from Elijah the
prophet.</q><note place='foot'>xxi. 12-15, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> His son Ahaziah apparently perished
without any prophetic warning; but when Joash and
his princes forsook the house of Jehovah and served
the Asherim and the idols, <q>He sent prophets to them
to bring them again to Jehovah,</q> among the rest
Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest. Joash
turned a deaf ear to the message, and put the prophet
to death.<note place='foot'>xxiv. 18-22, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>
</p>

<p>
When Amaziah bowed down before the gods of
Edom and burned incense unto them, Jehovah sent
unto him a prophet whose name is not recorded. His
mission failed, like that of Zechariah the son of
Jehoiada; and Amaziah, like Joash, showed no respect
for the person of the messenger of Jehovah. In this
case the prophet escaped with his life. He began to
deliver his message, but the king's patience soon failed,
and he said unto the prophet, <q>Have we made thee of
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
the king's counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be
smitten?</q> The prophet, we are told, <q>forbare</q>; but
his forbearance did not prevent his adding one brief and
bitter sentence: <q>I know that God hath determined to
destroy thee, because thou hast done this and hast not
hearkened unto my counsel.</q><note place='foot'>xiv. 15, 16, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> Then apparently he
departed in peace and was not smitten.
</p>

<p>
We have now reached the period of the prophets
whose writings are extant. We learn from the
headings of their works that Isaiah saw his <q>vision,</q>
and that the word of Jehovah came unto Hosea, in the
days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah; that the
word of Jehovah came to Micah in the days of Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah; and that Amos <q>saw</q> his
<q>words</q> in the days of Uzziah. But the chronicler
makes no reference to any of these prophets in
connection with either Uzziah, Jotham, or Ahaz.
Their writings would have afforded the best possible
materials for his history, yet he entirely neglected
them. In view of his anxiety to introduce into his
narrative all missions of prophets of which he found
any record, we can only suppose that he was so little
interested in the prophetical writings that he neither
referred to them nor recollected their dates.
</p>

<p>
To Ahaz in Chronicles, in spite of all his manifold and
persistent idolatry, no prophet was sent. The absence
of Divine warning marks his extraordinary wickedness.
In the book of Samuel the culmination of
Jehovah's displeasure against Saul is shown by His
refusal to answer him either by dreams, by Urim, or by
prophets. He sends no prophet to Ahaz, because the
wicked king of Judah is utterly reprobate. Prophecy,
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
the token of the Divine presence and favour, has
abandoned a nation given over to idolatry, and has
even taken a temporary refuge in Samaria. Jerusalem
was no longer worthy to receive the Divine messages,
and Oded was sent with his words of warning and
humane exhortation to the children of Ephraim. There
he met with a prompt and full obedience, in striking
contrast to the reception accorded by Joash and
Amaziah to the prophets of Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's history of the reign of Hezekiah
further illustrates his indifference to the prophets whose
writings are extant. In the book of Kings great
prominence is given to Isaiah. In the account of
Sennacherib's invasion his messages to Hezekiah are
given at considerable length.<note place='foot'>2 Kings xix. 5-7, 20-34.</note> He announces to the
king his approaching death and Jehovah's gracious
answers to Hezekiah's prayer for a respite and his
request for a sign. When Hezekiah, in his pride of
wealth, displayed his treasures to the Babylonian
ambassadors, Isaiah brought the message of Divine
rebuke and judgment. Chronicles characteristically
devotes three long chapters to ritual and Levites, and
dismisses Isaiah in half a sentence: <q>And Hezekiah
the king and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz,
prayed because of this</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the threatening language
of Sennacherib&mdash;<q>and cried to Heaven.</q><note place='foot'>xxxii. 20.</note> In the
accounts of Hezekiah's sickness and recovery and of
the Babylonian embassy the references to Isaiah are
entirely omitted. These omissions may be due to
lack of space, so much of which had been devoted to
the Levites that there was none to spare for the
prophet.
</p>

<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>

<p>
Indeed, at the very point where prophecy began to
exercise a controlling influence over the religion of
Judah the chronicler's interest in the subject altogether
flags. He tells us that Jehovah spake to Manasseh
and to his people, and refers to <q>the words of the seers
that spake to him in the name of Jehovah, the God
of Israel</q>;<note place='foot'>xxxiii. 10, 18.</note> but he names no prophet and does not
record the terms of any Divine message. In the case of
Manasseh his sources may have failed him, but we have
seen that in Hezekiah's reign he deliberately passes
over most of the references to Isaiah.
</p>

<p>
The chroniclers narrative of Josiah's reign adheres
more closely to the book of Kings. He reproduces
the mission from the king to the prophetess Huldah
and her Divine message of present forbearance and
future judgment. The other prophet of this reign is
the heathen king Pharaoh Necho, through whose
mouth the Divine warning is given to Josiah. Jeremiah
is only mentioned as lamenting over the last good
king.<note place='foot'>xxxv. 21, 22, 25, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> In the parallel text of this passage in the
apocryphal book of Esdras Pharaoh's remonstrance
is given in a somewhat expanded form; but the editor
of Esdras shrank from making the heathen king the
mouthpiece of Jehovah. While Chronicles tells us
that Josiah <q>hearkened not unto the words of Neco
from the mouth of God,</q> Esdras, glaringly inconsistent
both with the context and the history, tells us that he
did not regard <q>the words of the prophet Jeremiah
spoken by the mouth of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>1 Esdras i. 28.</note> This amended
statement is borrowed from the chronicler's account of
Zedekiah, who <q>humbled not himself before Jeremiah
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
the prophet, speaking from the mouth of Jehovah.</q>
But this king was not alone in his disobedience. As
the inevitable ruin of Jerusalem drew near, the whole
nation, priests and people alike, sank deeper and deeper
in sin. In these last days, <q>where sin abounded, grace
did yet more abound.</q> Jehovah exhausted the resources
of His mercy: <q>Jehovah, the God of their fathers, sent
to them by His messengers, rising up early and sending,
because He had compassion on His people and on His
dwelling-place.</q> It was all in vain: <q>They mocked
the messengers of God, and despised His words and
scoffed at His prophets, until the wrath of Jehovah
arose against His people, till there was no remedy.</q>
There are two other references in the concluding paragraphs
of Chronicles to the prophecies of Jeremiah;
but the history of prophecy in Judah closes with this
last great unavailing manifestation of prophetic activity.
</p>

<p>
Before considering the general idea of the prophet
that may be collected from the various notices in
Chronicles, we may devote a little space to the chronicler's
curious attitude towards our canonical prophets.
For the most part he simply follows the book of Kings
in making no reference to them; but his almost entire
silence as to Isaiah suggests that his imitation of his
authority in other cases is deliberate and intentional,
especially as we find him inserting one or two references
to Jeremiah not taken from the book of Kings. The
chronicler had much more opportunity of using the
canonical prophets than the author or authors of the
book of Kings. The latter wrote before Hebrew
literature had been collected and edited; but the
chronicler had access to all the literature of the
monarchy, Captivity, and even later times. His numerous
extracts from almost the entire range of the Historical
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
Books, together with the Pentateuch and Psalms, show
that his plan included the use of various sources, and
that he had both the means and ability to work out his
plan. He makes two references to Haggai and Zechariah,<note place='foot'>Ezra v. 1; vi. 14.</note>
so that if he ignores Amos, Hosea, and Micah,
and all but ignores Isaiah, we can only conclude that he
does so of set purpose. Hosea and Amos might be
excluded on account of their connection with the
northern kingdom; possibly the strictures of Isaiah
and Micah on the priesthood and ritual made the
chronicler unwilling to give them special prominence.
Such an attitude on the part of a typical representative
of the prevailing school of religious thought has an
important bearing on the textual and other criticism
of the early prophets. If they were neglected by the
authorities of the Temple in the interval between Ezra
and the Maccabees, the possibility of late additions and
alterations is considerably increased.
</p>

<p>
Let us now turn to the picture of the prophets
drawn for us by the chronicler. Both prophet and
priest are religious personages, otherwise they differ
widely in almost every particular; we cannot even
speak of them as both holding religious offices. The
term <q>office</q> has to be almost unjustifiably strained
in order to apply it to the prophet, and to use it thus
without explanation would be misleading. The qualifications,
status, duties, and rewards of the priests are
all fully prescribed by rigid and elaborate rules; but
the prophets were the children of the Spirit: <q>The
wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the
voice thereof, but knowest not whence it cometh and
whither it goeth; so is every one that is born of the
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
Spirit.</q> The priest was bound to be a physically perfect
male of the house of Aaron; the prophet might be
of any tribe and of either sex. The warlike Deborah
found a more peaceful successor in Josiah's counsellor
Huldah, and among the degenerate prophets of
Nehemiah's time a prophetess Noadiah<note place='foot'>Neh. vi. 14.</note> is specially
mentioned. The priestly or Levitical office did not
exclude its holder from the prophetic vocation. The
Levite Jahaziel delivered the message of Jehovah to
Jehoshaphat; and the prophet Zechariah, whom Joash
put to death, was the son of the high-priest Jehoiada,
and therefore himself a priest. Indeed, upon occasion
the prophetic gift was exercised by those whom we
should scarcely call prophets at all. Pharaoh Necho's
warning to Jehoshaphat is exactly parallel to the
prophetic exhortations addressed to other kings. In
the crisis of David's fortunes at Ziklag, when Judah
and Benjamin came out to meet him with apparently
doubtful intentions, their adhesion to the future king
was decided by a prophetic word given to the mighty
warrior Amasai: <q>Then the Spirit came upon Amasai,
who was one of the thirty, and he said, Thine are we,
David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse: peace,
peace, be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for
thy God helpeth thee.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xii. 18, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> In view of this wide distribution
of the prophetic gift, we are not surprised to find
it frequently exercised by the pious kings. They
receive and communicate to the nation direct intimations
of the Divine will. David gives to Solomon and the
people the instructions which God has given him with
regard to the Temple; God's promises are personally
addressed to Solomon, without the intervention of either
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
prophet or priest; Abijah rebukes and exhorts
Jeroboam and the Israelites very much as other
prophets address the wicked kings; the speeches
of Hezekiah and Josiah might equally well have been
delivered by one of the prophets. David indeed is
expressly called a prophet by St. Peter<note place='foot'>Acts ii. 30.</note>; and though
the immediate reference is to the Psalms, the chronicler's
history both of David and of other kings gives
them a valid claim to rank as prophets.
</p>

<p>
The authority and status of the prophets rested on
no official or material conditions, such as hedged in
the priestly office on every side. Accordingly their
ancestry, previous history, and social standing are
matters with which the historian has no concern. If
the prophet happens also to be a priest or Levite, the
chronicler, of course, knows and records his genealogy.
It was essential that the genealogy of a priest should
be known, but there are no genealogies of the
prophets; their order was like that of Melchizedek,
standing on the page of history <q>without father, without
mother, without genealogy</q>; they appear abruptly,
with no personal introduction, they deliver their message,
and then disappear with equal abruptness.
Sometimes not even their names are given. They had
the one qualification compared with which birth and
sex, rank and reputation, were trivial and meaningless
things. The living word of Jehovah was on their lips;
the power of His Spirit controlled their hearers; messenger
and message were alike their own credentials.
The supreme religious authority of the prophet testified
to the subordinate and accidental character of all rites
and symbols. On the other hand, the combination of
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
priest and prophet in the same system proved the
loftiest spirituality, the most emphatic recognition of
the direct communion of the soul with God, to be consistent
with an elaborate and rigid system of ritual.
The services and ministry of the Temple were like
lamps whose flame showed pale and dim when earth
and heaven were lit up by the lightnings of prophetic
inspiration.
</p>

<p>
The gifts and functions of the prophets did not lend
themselves to any regular discipline or organisation;
but we can roughly distinguish between two classes of
prophets. One class seem to have exercised their gifts
more systematically and continuously than others. Gad
and Nathan, Isaiah and Jeremiah, became practically
the domestic chaplains and spiritual advisers of David,
Hezekiah, and the last kings of Judah. Others are only
mentioned as delivering a single message; their ministry
seems to have been occasional, perhaps confined to a
single period of their lives. The Divine Spirit was
free to take the whole life or to take a part only; He
was not to be conditioned even by gifts of His own
bestowal.
</p>

<p>
Human organisation naturally attempted to classify
the possessors of the prophetic gift, to set them apart
as a regular order, perhaps even to provide them with
a suitable training, and, still more impossible task, to
select the proper recipients of the gift and to produce
and foster the prophetic inspiration. We read elsewhere
of <q>schools of the prophets</q> and <q>sons of the
prophets.</q> The chronicler omits all reference to such
institutions or societies; he declines to assign them any
place in the prophetic succession in Israel. The gift
of prophecy was absolutely dependent on the Divine
will, and could not be claimed as a necessary appurtenance
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
of the royal court at Jerusalem or a regular
order in the kingdom of Judah. The priests are included
in the list of David's ministers, but not the prophets
Gad and Nathan. Abijah mentions among the special
privileges of Judah <q>priests ministering unto Jehovah,
even the sons of Aaron and the Levites in their work</q>;
it does not occur to him to name prophets among the
regular and permanent ministers of Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler, in fact, does not recognise the professional
prophet. The fifty sons of the prophets that
watched Elisha divide the waters in the name of the
God of Elijah were no more prophets for him than the
four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal and the four
hundred prophets of the Asherah that ate at Jezebel's
table. The true prophet, like Amos, need not be either
a prophet or the son of a prophet in the professional
sense. Long before the chronicler's time the history
and teaching of the great prophets had clearly established
the distinction between the professional prophet,
who was appointed by man or by himself, and the
inspired messenger, who received a direct commission
from Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
In describing the prophet's sole qualification we have
also stated his function. He was the messenger of
Jehovah, and declared His will. The priest in his
ministrations represented Israel before God, and in
a measure represented God to Israel. The rites and
ceremonies over which he presided symbolised the
permanent and unchanging features of man's religious
experience and me eternal righteousness and mercy
of Him who is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.
From generation to generation men received the good
gifts of God, and brought the offerings of their gratitude;
they sinned against God and came to seek
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
forgiveness; and the house of Aaron met them generation
after generation in the same priestly robes, with
the same rites, in the one Temple, in token of the
unchanging willingness of Jehovah to accept and forgive
His children.
</p>

<p>
The prophet, too, represented God to man; his words
were the words of God; through him the Divine presence
and the Divine Spirit exerted their influence over
the hearts and consciences of his hearers. But while
the priestly ministrations symbolised the fixity and
permanence of God's eternal majesty, the prophets
expressed the infinite variety of His Divine nature and
its continual adaptation to all the changes of human
life. They came to the individual and to the nation in
each crisis of history with the Divine message that
enabled them to suit themselves to altered circumstances,
to grapple with new difficulties, and to solve
new problems. The priest and the prophet together
set forth the great paradox that the unchanging God is
the source of all change.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Lord God, by whom all change is wrought,</q></l>
<l>By whom new things to birth are brought,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In whom no change is known,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>To Thee we rise, in Thee we rest;</l>
<l>We stay at home, we go in quest,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Still Thou art our abode:</l>
<l>The rapture swells, the wonder grows,</l>
<l>As full on us new life still flows</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>From our unchanging God.</q></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
The prophetic utterances recorded by the chronicler
illustrate the work of the prophets in delivering the
message that met the present needs of the people.
There is nothing in Chronicles to encourage the
unspiritual notion that the main object of prophecy
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
was to give exact and detailed information as to the
remote future. There is prediction necessarily: it was
impossible to declare the will of God without stating
the punishment of sin and the victory of righteousness;
but prediction is only part of the declaration of God's
will. In Gad and Nathan prophecy appears as a means
of communication between the inquiring soul and God;
it does not, indeed, gratify curiosity, but rather gives
guidance in perplexity and distress. The later prophets
constantly intervene to initiate reform or to hinder the
carrying out of an evil policy. Gad and Nathan lent
their authority to David's organisation of the Temple
music; Asa's reform originated in the exhortation of
Oded the prophet; Jehoshaphat went out to meet the
Moabite and Ammonite invaders in response to the
inspiriting utterance of Jahaziel the Levite; Josiah
consulted the prophetess Huldah before carrying out
his reformation; the chiefs of Ephraim sent back the
Jewish captives in obedience to another Oded. On the
other hand, Shemaiah prevented Rehoboam from fighting
against Israel; Micaiah warned Ahab and Jehoshaphat
not to go up against Ramoth-gilead.
</p>

<p>
Often, however, the prophetic message gives the
interpretation of history, the Divine judgment upon
conduct, with its sentence of punishment or reward.
Hanani the seer, for instance, comes to Asa to show
him the real value of his apparently satisfactory alliance
with Benhadad, king of Syria: <q>Because thou hast
relied on the king of Syria, and hast not relied on
Jehovah thy God, therefore is the host of the king of
Syria escaped out of thine hand.... Herein thou
hast done foolishly; for from henceforth thou shalt
have wars.</q> Jehoshaphat is told why his ships were
broken: <q>Because thou hast joined thyself with
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
Ahaziah, Jehovah hath destroyed thy works.</q> Thus
the prophetic declaration of Divine judgment came to
mean almost exclusively rebuke and condemnation.
The witness of a good conscience may be left to speak
for itself; God does not often need to send a prophet
to His obedient servants in order to signify His
approval of their righteous acts. But the censures of
conscience need both the stimulus of external suggestion
and the support of external authority. Upon the
prophets was constantly laid the unwelcome task of
rousing and bracing the conscience for its stern duty.
They became the heralds of Divine wrath, the precursors
of national misfortune. Often, too, the warnings
that should have saved the people were neglected or
resented, and thus became the occasion of new sin and
severer punishment. We must not, however, lay too
much stress on this aspect of the prophets' work.
They were no mere Cassandras, announcing inevitable
ruin at the hands of a blind destiny; they were not
always, or even chiefly, the messengers of coming doom.
If they declared the wrath of God, they also vindicated
His justice; in the day of the Lord which they so often
foretold, mercy and grace tempered and at last overcame
judgment. They taught, even in their sternest
utterances, the moral government of the world and the
benevolent purpose of its Ruler. These are man's only
hope, even in his sin and suffering, the only ground
for effort, and the only comfort in misfortune.
</p>

<p>
There are, however, one or two elements in the
chronicler's notices of the prophets that scarcely harmonise
with this general picture. The scanty references
of the books of Samuel and Kings to the <q>schools</q>
and sons of the prophets have suggested the theory
that the prophets were the guardians of national education,
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
culture, and literature. The chronicler expressly
assigns the function to the Levites, and does not
recognise that the <q>schools of the prophets</q> had
any permanent significance for the religion of Israel,
possibly because they chiefly appear in connection with
the northern kingdom. At the same time, we find this
idea of the literary character of the prophets in
Chronicles in a new form. The authorities referred
to in the subscriptions to each reign bear the names
of the prophets who flourished during the reign. The
primary significance of the tradition followed by the
chronicler is the supreme importance of the prophet
for his period; he, and not the king, gives it a distinctive
character. Therefore the prophet gives his name
to his period, as the consuls at Rome, the Archon
Basileus at Athens, and the Assyrian priests gave their
own names to their year of office. Probably by the
time Chronicles was written the view had been adopted
which we know prevailed later on, and it was supposed
that the prophets wrote the Historical Books which bore
their names. The ancient prophets had given the Divine
interpretation of the course of events and pronounced
the Divine judgment on history. The Historical Books
were written for religious edification; they contained
a similar interpretation and judgment. The religious
instincts of later Judaism rightly classed them with
the prophetic Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
The striking contrast we have been able to trace
between the priests and the prophets in their qualifications
and duties extends also to their rewards. The
book of Kings gives us glimpses of the way in which
the reverent gratitude of the people made some provision
for the maintenance of the prophets. We are
all familiar with the hospitality of the Shunammite, and
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
we read how <q>a man from Baal-shalishah</q> brought
first-fruits to Elisha.<note place='foot'>2 Kings iv. 42.</note> But the chronicler omits all
such references as being connected with the northern
kingdom, and does not give us any similar information
as to the prophets of Judah. He is not usually indifferent
as to ways and means. He devotes some space
to the revenues of the kings of Judah, and delights to
dwell on the sources of priestly income. But it never
seems to occur to him that the prophets have any
wants to be provided for. To use George Macdonald's
phrase, he is quite content to leave them <q>on the lily
and sparrow footing.</q> The priesthood and the Levites
must be richly endowed; the honour of Israel and of
Jehovah is concerned in their having cities, tithes,
first-fruits, and offerings. Prophets are sent to reproach
the people when the priestly dues are withheld;
but for themselves the prophets might have said
with St. Paul, <q>We seek not yours, but you.</q> No one
supposed that the authority and dignity of the prophets
needed to be supported by ecclesiastical status, splendid
robes, and great incomes. Spiritual force so manifestly
resided in them that they could afford to dispense with
the most impressive symbols of power and authority.
On the other hand, they received an honour that was
never accorded to the priesthood: they suffered persecution
for the cause of Jehovah. Zechariah the son
of Jehoiada was put to death, and Micaiah the son of
Imlah was imprisoned. We are never told that the
priest as priest suffered persecution. Ahaz closed
the Temple, Manasseh set up an idol in the house of
God, but we do not read of either Ahaz or Manasseh
that they slew the priests of Jehovah. The teaching
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
of the prophets was direct and personal, and thus
eminently calculated to excite resentment and provoke
persecution; the priestly services, however, did not at
all interfere with concurrent idolatry, and the priests
were accustomed to receive and execute the orders of
the kings. There is nothing to suggest that they
sought to obtrude the worship of Jehovah upon unwilling
converts; and it is not improbable that some,
at any rate, of the priests allowed themselves to be
made the tools of the wicked kings. On the eve of
the Captivity we read that <q>the chiefs of the priests
and the people trespassed very greatly after all the
abominations of the heathen, and they polluted the
house of Jehovah.</q> No such disloyalty is recorded
of the prophets in Chronicles. The most splendid
incomes cannot purchase loyalty. It is still true that
<q>the hireling fleeth because he is a hireling</q>; men's
most passionate devotion is for the cause in which they
have suffered.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that the modern ministry presents
certain parallels to the ancient priesthood. Where are
we to look for an analogue to the prophet? If the
minister be, in a sense, a priest when he leads the
worship of the people, is he also a prophet when he
preaches to them? Preaching is intended to be&mdash;perhaps
we may venture to say that it mostly is&mdash;a
declaration of the will of God. Moreover, it is not the
exposition of a fixed and unchangeable ritual or even
of a set of rigid theological formulæ. The preacher, like
the prophet, seeks to meet the demands for new light
that are made by constantly changing circumstances;
he seeks to adapt the eternal truth to the varying needs
of individual lives. So far he is a prophet, but the
essential qualifications of the prophet are still to be
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
sought after. Isaiah and Jeremiah did not declare the
word of Jehovah as they had learnt it from a Bible or
any other book, nor yet according to the traditions of
a school or the teaching of great authorities; such
declaration might be made by the scribes and rabbis
in later times. But the prophets of Chronicles received
their message from Jehovah Himself; while they
mused upon the needs of the people, the fire of inspiration
burned within them; then they spoke. Moreover,
like their great antitype, they spoke with authority,
and not as the scribes; their words carried with them
conviction even when they did not produce obedience.
The reality of men's conviction of their Divine authority
was shown by the persecution to which they were
subjected. Are these tokens of the prophet also the
notes of the Christian ministry of preaching? Prophets
were found among the house of Aaron and from the
tribe of Levi, but not every Levite or priest was a
prophet. Every branch of the Christian Church has
numbered among its official ministers men who
delivered their message with an inspired conviction of
its truth; in them the power and presence of the
Spirit have compelled a belief in their authority to speak
for God: this belief has received the twofold attestation
of hearts and consciences submitted to the Divine
will on the one hand or of bitter and rancorous
hostility on the other. In every Church we find the
record of men who have spoken, <q>not in words which
man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Spirit teacheth.</q>
Such were Wyclif and Latimer, Calvin and Luther,
George Whitefield and the Wesleys; such, too, were
Moffat and Livingstone. Nor need we suppose that
in the modern Christian Church the gift of prophecy
has been confined to men of brilliant genius who have
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
been conspicuously successful. In the sacred canon
Haggai and Obadiah stand side by side with Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel. The chronicler recognises the
prophetic calling of men too obscure to be mentioned
by name. He whom God hath sent speaketh the
words of God, not necessarily the orator whom men
crowd to hear and whose name is recorded in history;
and God giveth not the Spirit by measure. Many of
the least distinguished of His servants are truly His
prophets, speaking, by the conviction He has given
them, a message which comes home with power to
some hearts at any rate, and is a savour of life unto
life and of death unto death. The seals of their
ministry are to be found in redeemed and purified
lives, and also only too often in the bitter and
vindictive ill-will of those whom their faithfulness has
offended.
</p>

<p>
We naturally expect to find that the official ministry
affords the most suitable sphere for the exercise of the
gift of prophecy. Those who are conscious of a Divine
message will often seek the special opportunities which
the ministry affords. But our study of Chronicles
reminds us that the vocation of the prophet cannot
be limited to any external organisation; it was not
confined to the official ministry of Israel; it cannot
be conditioned by recognition by bishops, presbyteries,
conferences, or Churches; it will often find its
only external credential in a gracious influence over individual
lives. Nay, the prophet may have his Divine
vocation and be entirely rejected of men. In Chronicles
we find prophets, like Zechariah the son of Jehoiada,
whose one Divine message is received with scorn and
defiance.
</p>

<p>
In practice, if not in theory, the Churches have long
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
since recognised that the prophetic gift is found outside
any official ministry, and that they may be taught the
will of God by men and women of all ranks and callings.
They have provided opportunities for the free exercise
of such gifts in lay preaching, missions, Sunday-schools,
meetings of all kinds.
</p>

<p>
We have here stumbled upon another modern controversy:
the desirability of women preaching. Chronicles
mentions prophetesses as well as prophets; on the
other hand, there were no Jewish priestesses. The
modern minister combines some priestly duties with
the opportunity, at least, of exercising the gift of
prophecy. The mention of only two or three prophetesses
in the Old Testament shows that the
possession of the gift by women was exceptional.
These few instances, however, are sufficient to prove
that God did not in old times limit the gift to men;
they suggest at any rate the possibility of its being
possessed by women now, and when women have
a Divine message the Church will not venture to
quench the Spirit. Of course the application of these
broad principles would have to be adapted to the
circumstances of individual Churches. Huldah, for
instance, is not described as delivering any public
address to the people; the king sent his ministers to
consult her in her own house. Whatever hesitation
may be felt about the public ministry of women, no
one will question their Divine commission to carry the
messages of God to the bedsides of the sick and the
homes of the poor. Most of us have known women to
whom men have gone, as Josiah's ministers went to
Huldah, to <q>inquire of the Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another practical question, the payment of the
ministers of religion, has already been raised by the
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
chronicler's account of the revenues of the priests.
What more do we learn on the subject from his silence
as to the maintenance of the prophets? The silence
is, of course, eloquent as to the extent to which even a
pious Levite may be preoccupied with his own worldly
interests and quite indifferent to other people's;
but it would not have been possible if the idea of
revenues and endowments for the prophets had ever
been very familiar to men's minds. It has been said
that to-day the prophet sells his inspiration, but the
gift of God can no more be bought and sold with
money now than in ancient Israel. The purely
spiritual character of true prophecy, its entire dependence
on Divine inspiration, makes it impossible to hire a
prophet at a fixed salary regulated by the quality and
extent of his gifts. By the grace of God, there is an
intimate practical connection between the work of the
official ministry and the inspired declaration of the
Divine will; and this connection has its bearing upon
the payment of ministers. Men's gratitude is stirred
when they have received comfort and help through
the spiritual gifts of their minister, but in principle
there is no connection between the gift of prophecy
and the payment of the ministry. A Church can
purchase the enjoyment of eloquence, learning, intellect,
and industry; a high character has a pecuniary value
for ecclesiastical as well as for commercial purposes.
The prophet may be provided with leisure, society, and
literature so that the Divine message may be delivered
in its most attractive form; he may be installed in a
large and well-appointed building, so that he may
have the best possible opportunity of delivering his
message; he will naturally receive a larger income when
he surrenders obscure and limited opportunities to
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
minister in some more suitable sphere. But when we
have said all, it is still only the accessories that have
to do with payment, not the Divine gift of prophecy
itself. When the prophet's message is not comforting,
when his words grate upon the theological and social
prejudices of his hearers, especially when he is invited
to curse and is Divinely compelled to bless, there is no
question of payment for such ministry. It has been
said of Christ, <q>For the minor details necessary to
secure respect, and obedience, and the enthusiasm of
the vulgar, for the tact, the finesse, the compromising
faculty, the judicious ostentation of successful politicians&mdash;for
these arts He was not prepared.</q><note place='foot'>Abbott, <hi rend='italic'>Through Nature to Christ</hi>, p. 295.</note> Those who
imitate their Master often share His reward.
</p>

<p>
The slight and accidental connection of the payment
of ministers with their prophetic gifts is further
illustrated by the free exercise of such gifts by
men and women who have no ecclesiastical status
and do not seek any material reward. Here again
any exact adoption of ancient methods is impossible;
we may accept from the chronicler the great principle
that loyal believers will make all adequate provision for
the service and work of Jehovah, and that they will be
prepared to honour Him in the persons of those whom
they choose to represent them before Him, and also of
those whom they recognise as delivering to them His
messages. On the other hand, the prophet&mdash;and for our
present purpose we may extend the term to the
humblest and least gifted Christian who in any way
seeks to speak for Christ&mdash;the prophet speaks by the
impulse of the Spirit and from no meaner motive.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the functions of the prophet, the
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
Spirit is as entirely free to dictate His own message
as He is to choose His own messenger. The chronicler's
prophets were concerned with foreign politics&mdash;alliances
with Syria and Assyria, wars with Egypt and
Samaria&mdash;as well as with the ritual of the Temple and
the worship of Jehovah. They discerned a religious
significance in the purely secular matter of a census.
Jehovah had His purposes for the civil government
and international policy of Israel as well as for its
creed and services. If we lay down the principle that
politics, whether local or national, are to be kept out of
the pulpit, we must either exclude from the official
ministry all who possess any measure of the prophetic
gift, or else carefully stipulate that, if they be conscious
of any obligation to declare the Lord's will in matters
of public righteousness, they shall find some more
suitable place than the Lord's house and some more
suitable time than the Lord's day. When we suggest
that the prophet should mind his own business by
confining himself to questions of doctrine, worship, and
the religious experiences of the individual, we are in
danger of denying God's right to a voice in social and
national affairs.
</p>

<p>
Turning, however, to more directly ecclesiastical
affairs, we have noted that Asa's reformation received its
first impulse from the utterances of the prophet Azariah
or Oded, and also that one feature of the prophet's work
is to provide for the fresh needs developed by changing
circumstances. A priesthood or any other official
ministry is often wanting in elasticity; it is necessarily
attached to an established organisation and trammelled
by custom and tradition. The Holy Spirit in all ages
has commissioned prophets as the free agents in new
movements in the Divine government of the world.
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
They may be ecclesiastics, like many of the Reformers
and like the Wesleys; but they are not dominated by
the official spirit. The initial impulse that moves such
men is partly one of recoil from their environment;
and the environment in return casts them out. Again,
prophets may become ecclesiastics, like the tinker to
whom English-speaking Christians owe one of their
great religious classics and the cobbler who stirred up
the Churches to missionary enthusiasm. Or they
may remain from beginning to end without official
status in any Church, like the apostle of the anti-slavery
movement. In any case the impulse to a
larger, purer, and nobler standard of life than that
consecrated by long usage and ancient tradition does
not come from the ecclesiastical official because of his
official training and experience; the living waters that
go out of Jerusalem in the day of the Lord are too
wide, and deep, and strong to flow in the narrow rock-hewn
aqueducts of tradition: they make new channels
for themselves; and these channels are the men who
do not demand that the Spirit shall speak according to
familiar formulæ and stereotyped ideas, but are willing
to be the prophets of strange and even uncongenial
truth. Or, to use the great metaphor of St. John's
Gospel, with such men, both for themselves and for
others, the water that the Lord gives them becomes a
well of water springing up unto eternal life.
</p>

<p>
But the chronicler's picture of the work of the
prophets has its darker side. Few were privileged
to give the signal for an immediate and happy reformation.
Most of the prophets were charged with
messages of rebuke and condemnation, so that they
were ready to cry out with Jeremiah, <q>Woe is me, my
mother, that thou hast borne me, a man of strife and
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
a man of contention to the whole earth! I have not
lent on usury, neither have men lent to me on usury,
yet every one of them doth curse me.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. xv. 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
Perhaps even to-day the prophetic spirit often
charges its possessors with equally unwelcome duties.
We trust that the Christian conscience is more sensitive
than that of ancient Israel, and that the Church is
more ready to profit by the warnings addressed to it;
but the response to the sterner teaching of the Spirit is
not always accompanied by a kindly feeling towards
the teacher, and even where there is progress, the
progress is slow compared to the eager longing of the
prophet for the spiritual growth of his hearers. And
yet the sequel of the chronicler's history suggests
some relief to the gloomier side of the picture. Prophet
after prophet utters his unavailing and seemingly
useless rebuke, and delivers his announcement of
coming ruin, and at last the ruin falls upon the nation.
But that is not the end. Before the chronicler wrote
there had arisen a restored Israel, purified from idolatry
and delivered from many of its former troubles. The
Restoration was only rendered possible through the
continued testimony of the prophets to the Lord and His
righteousness. However barren of immediate results
such testimony may seem to-day, it is still the word of
the Lord that cannot return unto Him void, but shall
accomplish that which He pleaseth and shall prosper
in the thing whereto He sent it.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's conception of the prophetic character
of the historian, whereby his narrative sets forth God's
win and interprets His purposes, is not altogether
popular at present. The teleological view of history is
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
somewhat at a discount. Yet the prophetic method, so
to speak, of Carlyle and Ruskin is largely historical;
and even in so unlikely a quarter as the works of
George Eliot we can find an example of didactic history.
<hi rend='italic'>Romola</hi> is largely taken up with the story of Savonarola,
told so as to bring out its religious significance.
But teleological history is sometimes a failure even
from the standpoint of the Christian student, because it
defeats its own ends. He who is bent on deducing
lessons from history may lay undue stress on part of
its significance and obscure the rest. The historian is
perhaps most a prophet when he leaves history to
speak for itself. In this sense, we may venture to
attribute a prophetic character to purely scientific
history; accurate and unbiassed narrative is the best
starting-point for the study of the religious significance
of the course of events.
</p>

<p>
In concluding our inquiry as to how far modern
Church life is illustrated by the work of the prophets,
one is tempted to dwell for a moment on the methods
they did not use and the subjects not dealt with in
their utterances. This theme, however, scarcely belongs
to the exposition of Chronicles; it would be more
appropriate to a complete examination of the history
and writings of the prophets. One point, however,
may be noticed. Their utterances in Chronicles lay
less direct stress on moral considerations than the
writings of the canonical prophets, not because of any
indifference to morality, but because, seen in the
distance of a remote past, all other sins seemed to be
summed up in faithlessness to Jehovah. Perhaps we
may see in this a suggestion of a final judgment of
history, which should be equally instructive to the
religious man who has any inclination to disparage
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
morality and to the moral man who wishes to ignore
religion.
</p>

<p>
Our review and discussion of the varied references
of Chronicles to the prophets brings home to us with
fresh force the keen interest felt in them by the
chronicler and the supreme importance he attached to
their work. The reverent homage of a Levite of the
second Temple centuries after the golden age of
prophecy is an eloquent testimony to the unique position
of the prophets in Israel. His treatment of the subject
shows that the lofty ideal of their office and mission
had lost nothing in the course of the development of
Judaism; his selection from the older material emphasises
the independence of the true prophet of any
professional status or consideration of material reward;
his sense of the importance of the prophets to the
State and Church in Judah is an encouragement to
those <q>who look for redemption in Jerusalem,</q> and
who trust the eternal promise of God that in all times
of His people's need He <q>will raise up a prophet from
among their brethren, ... and I will put My words
in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that
I shall command them.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xviii. 18.</note> <q>The memorial of the
prophets was blessed, ... for they comforted Jacob,
and delivered them by assured hope.</q><note place='foot'>Ecclus. xlix. 10.</note> Many prophets
of the Church have also left a blessed memorial of
comfort and deliverance, and God ever renews this
more than apostolic succession.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. Satan. 1 Chron. xxi.-xxii. 1.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>And again the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and
He moved David against them saying, Go, number Israel and Judah.</q>&mdash;2
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sam.</hi> xxiv. 1.
</p>

<p>
<q>And Satan stood up against Israel, and moved David to number
Israel.</q>&mdash;1 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Chron.</hi> xxi. 1.
</p>

<p>
<q>Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for
God cannot be tempted with evil, and He Himself tempteth no man:
but each man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own lust and
enticed.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>James</hi> i, 13, 14.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The census of David is found both in the book of
Samuel and in Chronicles, in very much the
same form; but the chronicler has made a number
of small but important alterations and additions.
Taken together, these changes involve a new interpretation
of the history, and bring out lessons that cannot so
easily be deduced from the narrative in the book of
Samuel. Hence it is necessary to give a separate
exposition of the narrative in Chronicles.
</p>

<p>
As before, we will first review the alterations made
by the chronicler and then expound the narrative in
the form in which it left his hand, or rather in the
form in which it stands in the Masoretic text. Any
attempt to deal with the peculiarly complicated problem
of the textual criticism of Chronicles would be out of
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
place here. Probably there are no corruptions of the
text that would appreciably affect the general exposition
of this chapter.
</p>

<p>
At the very outset the chronicler substitutes Satan
for Jehovah, and thus changes the whole significance of
the narrative. This point is too important to be dealt
with casually, and must be reserved for special consideration
later on. In ver. 2 there is a slight change
that marks the different points of the views of the
Chronicler and the author of the narrative in the
book of Samuel. The latter had written that Joab
numbered the people from Dan to Beersheba, a merely
conventional phrase indicating the extent of the census.
It might possibly, however, have been taken to denote
that the census began in the north and was concluded
in the south. To the chronicler, whose interests all
centred in Judah, such an arrangement seemed absurd;
and he carefully guarded against any mistake by altering
<q>Dan to Beersheba</q> into <q>Beersheba to Dan.</q> In
ver. 3 the substance of Joab's words is not altered,
but various slight touches are added to bring out more
clearly and forcibly what is implied in the book of
Samuel. Joab had spoken of the census as being the
king's pleasure.<note place='foot'>R.V. <q>delight in</q> is somewhat too strong.</note> It was scarcely appropriate to speak
of David <q>taking pleasure in</q> a suggestion of Satan.
In Chronicles Joab's words are less forcible, <q>Why doth
my lord require this thing?</q> Again, in the book of
Samuel Joab protests against the census without
assigning any reason. The context, it is true, readily
supplies one; but in Chronicles all is made clear by the
addition, <q>Why will he</q> (David) <q>be a cause of guilt
unto Israel?</q> Further on the chronicler's special
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
interest in Judah again betrays itself. The book of
Samuel described, with some detail, the progress of the
enumerators through Eastern and Northern Palestine
by way of Beersheba to Jerusalem. Chronicles having
already made them start from Beersheba, omits these
details.
</p>

<p>
In ver. 5 the numbers in Chronicles differ not only
from those of the older narrative, but also from the
chronicler's own statistics in chap. xxvii. In this
last account the men of war are divided into twelve
courses of twenty-four thousand each, making a total
of two hundred and eighty-eight thousand; in the
book of Samuel Israel numbers eight hundred thousand,
and Judah five hundred thousand; but in our
passage Israel is increased to eleven hundred thousand,
and Judah is reduced to four hundred and seventy
thousand. Possibly the statistics in chap. xxvii.
are not intended to include all the fighting men,
otherwise the figures cannot be harmonised. The
discrepancy between our passage and the book of
Samuel is perhaps partly explained by the following
verse, which is an addition of the chronicler. In the
book of Samuel the census is completed, but our
additional verse states that Levi and Benjamin were
not included in the census. The chronicler understood
that the five hundred thousand assigned to Judah in
the older narrative were the joint total of Judah and
Benjamin; he accordingly reduced the total by thirty
thousand, because, according to his view, Benjamin was
omitted from the census. The increase in the number
of the Israelites is unexpected. The chronicler does
not usually overrate the northern tribes. Later on
Jeroboam, eighteen years after the disruption, takes the
field against Abijah with <q>eight hundred thousand
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
chosen men,</q> a phrase that implies a still larger
number of fighting men, if all had been mustered.
Obviously the rebel king would not be expected to be
able to bring into the field as large a force as the
entire strength of Israel in the most flourishing days
of David. The chronicler's figures in these two
passages are consistent, but the comparison is not an
adequate reason for the alteration in the present
chapter. Textual corruption is always a possibility in
case of numbers, but on the whole this particular
change does not admit of a satisfactory explanation.
</p>

<p>
In ver. 7 we have a very striking alteration. According
to the book of Samuel, David's repentance was
entirely spontaneous: <q>David's heart smote him after
that he had numbered the people</q><note place='foot'>It is, however, possible that the text in Samuel is a corruption of
text more closely parallel to that of Chronicles.</note>; but here God
smites Israel, and then David's conscience awakes.
In ver. 12 the chronicler makes a slight addition,
apparently to gratify his literary taste. In the original
narrative the third alternative offered to David had
been described simply as <q>the pestilence,</q> but in
Chronicles the words <q>the sword of Jehovah</q> are
added in antithesis to <q>the sword of Thine enemies</q>
in the previous verse.
</p>

<p>
Ver. 16, which describes David's vision of the
angel with the drawn sword, is an expansion of the
simple statement of the book of Samuel that David
saw the angel. In ver. 18 we are not merely told
that Gad spake to David, but that he spake by the
command of the angel of Jehovah. Ver. 20, which
tells us how Ornan saw the angel, is an addition of
the chronicler's. All these changes lay stress upon
the intervention of the angel, and illustrate the interest
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
taken by Judaism in the ministry of angels. Zechariah,
the prophet of the Restoration, received his messages
by the dispensation of angels; and the title of the
last canonical prophet, Malachi, probably means <q>the
Angel.</q> The change from Araunah to Ornan is a mere
question of spelling. Possibly Ornan is a somewhat
Hebraised form of the older Jebusite name Araunah.
</p>

<p>
In ver. 22 the reference to <q>a full price</q> and other
changes in the form of David's words are probably due
to the influence of Gen. xxiii. 9. In ver. 23 the
chronicler's familiarity with the ritual of sacrifice has
led him to insert a reference to a meal offering, to
accompany the burnt offering. Later on the chronicler
omits the somewhat ambiguous words which seem to
speak of Araunah as a king. He would naturally avoid
anything like a recognition of the royal status of a
Jebusite prince.
</p>

<p>
In ver. 25 David pays much more dearly for Ornan's
threshing-floor than in the book of Samuel. In the
latter the price is fifty shekels of silver, in the former
six hundred shekels of gold. Most ingenious attempts
have been made to harmonise the two statements.
It has been suggested that fifty shekels of silver
means silver to the value of fifty shekels of gold and
paid in gold, and that six hundred shekels of gold
means the value of six hundred shekels of silver paid
in gold. A more lucid but equally impossible explanation
is that David paid fifty shekels for every tribe, six
hundred in all.<note place='foot'>Noldius and R. Salom. <hi rend='italic'>apud</hi> Bertheau i. 1.</note> The real reason for the change is
that when the Temple became supremely important to
the Jews the small price of fifty shekels for the site
seemed derogatory to the dignity of the sanctuary; six
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
hundred shekels of gold was a more appropriate sum.
Abraham had paid four hundred shekels for a burying-place;
and a site for the Temple, where Jehovah had
chosen to put His name, must surely have cost more.
The chronicler followed the tradition which had grown
up under the influence of this feeling.
</p>

<p>
Chaps. xxi. 27-xxii. 1 are an addition. According to
the Levitical law, David was falling into grievous sin
in sacrificing anywhere except before the Mosaic altar
of burnt offering. The chronicler therefore states the
special circumstances that palliated this offence against
the exclusive privileges of the one sanctuary of Jehovah.
He also reminds us that this threshing-floor became
the site of the altar of burnt offering for Solomon's
temple. Here he probably follows an ancient and
historical tradition; the prominence given to the
threshing-floor in the book of Samuel indicates the
special sanctity of the site. The Temple is the only
sanctuary whose site could be thus connected with the
last days of David. When the book of Samuel was
written, the facts were too familiar to need any explanation;
every one knew that the Temple stood on the
site of Araunah's threshing-floor. The chronicler,
writing centuries later, felt it necessary to make an
explicit statement on the subject.
</p>

<p>
Having thus attempted to understand how our
narrative assumed its present form, we will now tell
the chronicler's story of these incidents. The long
reign of David was drawing to a close. Hitherto he
had been blessed with uninterrupted prosperity and
success. His armies had been victorious over all the
enemies of Israel, the borders of the land of Jehovah
had been extended, David himself was lodged with
princely splendour, and the services of the Ark were
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
conducted with imposing ritual by a numerous array
of priests and Levites. King and people alike were
at the zenith of their glory. In worldly prosperity
and careful attention to religious observances David
and his people were not surpassed by Job himself.
Apparently their prosperity provoked the envious
malice of an evil and mysterious being, who appears
only here in Chronicles: Satan, the persecutor of Job.
The trial to which he subjected the loyalty of David
was more subtle and suggestive than his assault upon
Job. He harassed Job as the wind dealt with the
traveller in the fable, and Job only wrapped the cloak
of his faith closer about him; Satan allowed David to
remain in the full sunshine of prosperity, and seduced
him into sin by fostering his pride in being the
powerful and victorious prince of a mighty people.
He suggested a census. David's pride would be
gratified by obtaining accurate information as to the
myriads of his subjects. Such statistics would be
useful for the civil organisation of Israel; the king
would learn where and how to recruit his army or
to find an opportunity to impose additional taxation.
The temptation appealed alike to the king, the soldier,
and the statesman, and did not appeal in vain. David
at once instructed Joab and the princes to proceed
with the enumeration; Joab demurred and protested:
the census would be a cause of guilt unto Israel.
But not even the great influence of the commander-in-chief
could turn the king from his purpose. His
word prevailed against Joab, wherefore Joab departed,
and went throughout all Israel, and came to Jerusalem.
This brief general statement indicates a long and
laborious task, simplified and facilitated in some
measure by the primitive organisation of society and
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
by rough and ready methods adopted to secure the
very moderate degree of accuracy with which an
ancient Eastern sovereign would be contented. When
Xerxes wished to ascertain the number of the vast
army with which he set out to invade Greece, his
officers packed ten thousand men into as small a space
as possible and built a wall round them; then they
turned them out, and packed the space again and
again; and so in time they ascertained how many
tens of thousands of men there were in the army.
Joab's methods would be different, but perhaps not
much more exact. He would probably learn from
the <q>heads of fathers' houses</q> the number of fighting
men in each family. Where the hereditary chiefs of
a district were indifferent, he might make some rough
estimate of his own. We may be sure that both Joab
and the local authorities would be careful to err on the
safe side. The king was anxious to learn that he
possessed a large number of subjects. Probably as
the officers of Xerxes went on with their counting
they omitted to pack the measured area as closely
as they did at first; they might allow eight or nine
thousand to pass for ten thousand. Similarly David's
servants would, to say the least, be anxious not to
underestimate the number of his subjects. The work
apparently went on smoothly; nothing is said that
indicates any popular objection or resistance to the
census; the process of enumeration was not interrupted
by any token of Divine displeasure against the <q>cause
of guilt unto Israel.</q> Nevertheless Joab's misgivings
were not set at rest; he did what he could to limit
the range of the census and to withdraw at least two
of the tribes from the impending outbreak of Divine
wrath. The tribe of Levi would be exempt from
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
taxation and the obligation of military service; Joab
could omit them without rendering his statistics less
useful for military and financial purposes. In not
including the Levites in the general census of Israel,
Joab was following the precedent set by the numbering
in the wilderness.
</p>

<p>
Benjamin was probably omitted in order to protect
the Holy City, the chronicler following that form of the
ancient tradition which assigned Jerusalem to Benjamin.<note place='foot'>Josh. xviii. 28; Judges i. 21, as against Josh. xv. 63; Judges i. 8,
which assign the city to Judah.</note>
Later on,<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxvii. 23, 24.</note> however, the chronicler seems to imply that
these two tribes left to the last were not numbered
because of the growing dissatisfaction of Joab with his
task: <q>Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but
finished not.</q> But these different reasons for the
omission of Levi and Benjamin do not mutually exclude
each other. Another limitation is also stated in the
later reference: <q>David took not the number of them
twenty years old and under, because Jehovah had
said that He would increase Israel like to the stars of
heaven.</q> This statement and explanation seems a
little superfluous; the census was specially concerned
with the fighting men, and in the book of Numbers only
those over twenty are numbered. But we have seen
elsewhere that the chronicler has no great confidence
in the intelligence of his readers, and feels bound to
state definitely matters that have only been implied and
might be overlooked. Here, therefore, he calls our
attention to the fact that the numbers previously given
do not comprise the whole male population, but only
the adults.
</p>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<p>
At last the census, so far as it was carried out at all,
was finished, and the results were presented to the
king. They are meagre and bald compared to the
volumes of tables which form the report of a modern
census. Only two divisions of the country are recognised:
<q>Judah</q> and <q>Israel,</q> or the ten tribes. The
total is given for each: eleven hundred thousand for
Israel, four hundred and seventy thousand for Judah,
in all fifteen hundred and seventy thousand. Whatever
details may have been given to the king, he would be
chiefly interested in the grand total. Its figures would
be the most striking symbol of the extent of his
authority and the glory of his kingdom.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps during the months occupied in taking the
census David had forgotten the ineffectual protests of
Joab, and was able to receive his report without any
presentiment of coming evil. Even if his mind were not
altogether at ease, all misgivings would for the time
be forgotten. He probably made or had made for him
some rough calculation as to the total of men, women,
and children that would correspond to the vast array
of fighting men. His servants would not reckon the
entire population at less than nine or ten millions. His
heart would be uplifted with pride as he contemplated
the statement of the multitudes that were the subjects
of his crown and prepared to fight at his bidding. The
numbers are moderate compared with the vast populations
and enormous armies of the great powers of
modern Europe; they were far surpassed by the Roman
empire and the teeming populations of the valleys of
the Nile, the Euphrates, and the Tigris; but during the
Middle Ages it was not often possible to find in Western
Europe so large a population under one government or
so numerous an army under one banner. The resources
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
of Cyrus may not have been greater when he started
on his career of conquest; and when Xerxes gathered
into one motley horde the warriors of half the known
world, their total was only about double the number of
David's robust and warlike Israelites. There was no
enterprise that was likely to present itself to his
imagination that he might not have undertaken with
a reasonable probability of success. He must have
regretted that his days of warfare were past, and that
the unwarlike Solomon, occupied with more peaceful
tasks, would allow this magnificent instrument of
possible conquests to rust unused.
</p>

<p>
But the king was not long left in undisturbed enjoyment
of his greatness. In the very moment of his
exaltation, some sense of the Divine displeasure fell
upon him.<note place='foot'>Ver. 7 is apparently a general anticipation of the narrative in
vv. 9-15.</note> Mankind has learnt by a long and sad
experience to distrust its own happiness. The brightest
hours have come to possess a suggestion of possible
catastrophe, and classic story loved to tell of the
unavailing efforts of fortunate princes to avoid their
inevitable downfall. Polycrates and Crœsus, however,
had not tempted the Divine anger by ostentatious pride;
David's power and glory had made him neglectful of
the reverent homage due to Jehovah, and he had
sinned in spite of the express warnings of his most
trusted minister.
</p>

<p>
When the revulsion of feeling came, it was complete.
The king at once humbled himself under the mighty
hand of God, and made full acknowledgment of his sin
and folly: <q>I have sinned greatly in that I have done
this thing: but now put away, I beseech Thee, the
iniquity of Thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.</q>
</p>

<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>

<p>
The narrative continues as in the book of Samuel.
Repentance could not avert punishment, and the
punishment struck directly at David's pride of power
and glory. The great population was to be decimated
either by famine, war, or pestilence. The king chose
to suffer from the pestilence, <q>the sword of Jehovah</q>:
<q>Let me fall now into the hand of Jehovah, for very
great are His mercies; and let me not fall into the
hand of man. So Jehovah sent a pestilence upon
Israel, and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.</q>
Not three days since Joab handed in his report, and
already a deduction of seventy thousand would have to
be made from its total; and still the pestilence was not
checked, for <q>God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to
destroy it.</q> If, as we have supposed, Joab had withheld
Jerusalem from the census, his pious caution was
now rewarded: <q>Jehovah repented Him of the evil, and
said to the destroying angel, It is enough; now stay
thine hand.</q> At the very last moment the crowning
catastrophe was averted. In the Divine counsels
Jerusalem was already delivered, but to human eyes
its fate still trembled in the balance: <q>And David
lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of Jehovah stand
between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn
sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem.</q> So
another great Israelite soldier lifted up his eyes beside
Jericho and beheld the captain of the host of Jehovah
standing over against him with his sword drawn in his
hand.<note place='foot'>Josh. v. 13.</note> Then the sword was drawn to smite the
enemies of Israel, but now it was turned to smite Israel
itself. David and his elders fell upon their faces as
Joshua had done before them: <q>And David said unto
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
God, Is it not I that commanded the people to be
numbered? even I it is that have sinned and done very
wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done? Let
Thine hand, I pray Thee, O Jehovah my God, be
against me and against my father's house, but not
against Thy people, that they should be plagued.</q>
</p>

<p>
The awful presence returned no answer to the guilty
king, but addressed itself to the prophet Gad, and
commanded <emph>him</emph> to bid David go up and build an altar
to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
The command was a message of mercy. Jehovah permitted
David to build Him an altar; He was prepared
to accept an offering at his hands. The king's prayers
were heard, and Jerusalem was saved from the pestilence.
But still the angel stretched out his drawn
sword over Jerusalem; he waited till the reconciliation
of Jehovah with His people should have been duly
ratified by solemn sacrifices. At the bidding of the
prophet, David went up to the threshing-floor of Ornan
the Jebusite. Sorrow and reassurance, hope and fear,
contended for the mastery. No sacrifice could call back
to life the seventy thousand victims whom the pestilence
had already destroyed, and yet the horror of its ravages
was almost forgotten in relief at the deliverance of
Jerusalem from the calamity that had all but overtaken
it. Even now the uplifted sword might be only
back for a time; Satan might yet bring about some
heedless and sinful act, and the respite might end not
in pardon, but in the execution of God's purpose of
vengeance. Saul had been condemned because he
sacrificed too soon; now perhaps delay would be fatal.
Uzzah had been smitten because he touched the Ark;
till the sacrifice was actually offered who could tell
whether some thoughtless blunder would not again
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
provoke the wrath of Jehovah? Under ordinary circumstances
David would not have dared to sacrifice
anywhere except upon the altar of burnt offering before
the tabernacle at Gibeon; he would have used the
ministry of priests and Levites. But ritual is helpless
in great emergencies. The angel of Jehovah with the
drawn sword seemed to bar the way to Gibeon, as once
before he had barred Balaam's progress when he came
to curse Israel. In his supreme need David builds his
own altar and offers his own sacrifices; he receives the
Divine answer without the intervention this time of
either priest or prophet. By God's most merciful and
mysterious grace, David's guilt and punishment, his
repentance and pardon, broke down all barriers between
himself and God.
</p>

<p>
But, as he went up to the threshing-floor, he was
still troubled and anxious. The burden was partly lifted
from his heart, but he still craved full assurance of
pardon. The menacing attitude of the destroying angel
seemed to hold out little promise of mercy and forgiveness,
and yet the command to sacrifice would be cruel
mockery if Jehovah did not intend to be gracious to
His people and His anointed.
</p>

<p>
At the threshing-floor Ornan and his four sons were
threshing wheat, apparently unmoved by the prospect
of the threatened pestilence. In Egypt the Israelites
were protected from the plagues with which their
oppressors were punished. Possibly now the situation
was reversed, and the remnant of the Canaanites in
Palestine were not afflicted by the pestilence that fell
upon Israel. But Ornan turned back and saw the
angel; he may not have known the grim mission with
which the Lord's messenger had been entrusted, but
the aspect of the destroyer, his threatening attitude, and
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
the lurid radiance of his unsheathed and outstretched
sword must have seemed unmistakable tokens of
coming calamity. Whatever might be threatened for
the future, the actual appearance of this supernatural
visitant was enough to unnerve the stoutest heart; and
Ornan's four sons hid themselves.
</p>

<p>
Before long, however, Ornan's terrors were somewhat
relieved by the approach of less formidable visitors.
The king and his followers had ventured to show
themselves openly, in spite of the destroying angel;
and they had ventured with impunity. Ornan went
forth and bowed himself to David with his face to the
ground. In ancient days the father of the faithful,
oppressed by the burden of his bereavement, went
to the Hittites to purchase a burying-place for his wife.
Now the last of the Patriarchs, mourning for the
sufferings of his people, came by Divine command to
the Jebusite to purchase the ground on which to offer
sacrifices, that the plague might be stayed from the
people. The form of bargaining was somewhat similar
in both cases. We are told that bargains are concluded
in much the same fashion to-day. Abraham had paid
four hundred shekels of silver for the field of Ephron
in Machpelah, <q>with the cave which was therein, and all
the trees that were in the field.</q> The price of Ornan's
threshing-floor was in proportion to the dignity and
wealth of the royal purchaser and the sacred purpose
for which it was designed. The fortunate Jebusite
received no less than six hundred shekels of gold.
</p>

<p>
David built his altar, and offered up his sacrifices
and prayers to Jehovah. Then, in answer to David's
prayers, as later in answer to Solomon's, fire fell from
heaven upon the altar of burnt offering, and all this
while the sword of Jehovah flamed across the heavens
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
above Jerusalem, and the destroying angel remained
passive, but to all appearances unappeased. But as
the fire of God fell from heaven, Jehovah gave yet
another final and convincing token that He would no
longer execute judgment against His people. In spite
of all that had happened to reassure them, the spectators
must have been thrilled with alarm when they saw that
the angel of Jehovah no longer remained stationary,
and that his flaming sword was moving through the
heavens. Their renewed terror was only for a moment:
<q>the angel put up his sword again into the sheath
thereof,</q> and the people breathed more freely when
they saw the instrument of Jehovah's wrath vanish
out of their sight.
</p>

<p>
The use of Machpelah as a patriarchal burying-place
led to the establishment of a sanctuary at Hebron,
which continued to be the seat of a debased and
degenerate worship even after the coming of Christ.
It is even now a Mohammedan holy place. But on
the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite there was
to arise a more worthy memorial of the mercy and
judgment of Jehovah. Without the aid of priestly
oracle or prophetic utterance, David was led by the
Spirit of the Lord to discern the significance of the
command to perform an irregular sacrifice in a hitherto
unconsecrated place. When the sword of the destroying
angel interposed between David and the Mosaic
tabernacle and altar of Gibeon, the way was not
merely barred against the king and his court on one
exceptional occasion. The incidents of this crisis
symbolised the cutting off for ever of the worship of
Israel from its ancient shrine and the transference of
the Divinely appointed centre of the worship of Jehovah
to the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, that is
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
to say to Jerusalem, the city of David and the capital
of Judah.
</p>

<p>
The lessons of this incident, so far as the chronicler
has simply borrowed from his authority, belong to the
exposition of the book of Samuel. The main features
peculiar to Chronicles are the introduction of the evil
angel Satan, together with the greater prominence
given to the angel of Jehovah, and the express statement
that the scene of David's sacrifice became the site
of Solomon's altar of burnt offering.
</p>

<p>
The stress laid upon angelic agency is characteristic
of later Jewish literature, and is especially marked in
Zechariah and Daniel. It was no doubt partly due to
the influence of the Persian religion, but it was also a
development from the primitive faith of Israel, and the
development was favoured by the course of Jewish
history. The Captivity and the Restoration, with the
events that preceded and accompanied these revolutions,
enlarged the Jewish experience of nature and man.
The captives in Babylon and the fugitives in Egypt
saw that the world was larger than they had imagined.
In Josiah's reign the Scythians from the far North
swept over Western Asia, and the Medes and Persians
broke in upon Assyria and Chaldæa from the remote
East. The prophets claimed Scythians, Medes, and
Persians as the instruments of Jehovah. The Jewish
appreciation of the majesty of Jehovah, the Maker and
Ruler of the world, increased as they learnt more of
the world He had made and ruled; but the invasion
of a remote and unknown people impressed them with
the idea of infinite dominion and unlimited resources,
beyond all knowledge and experience. The course of
Israelite history between David and Ezra involved as
great a widening of man's ideas of the universe as
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
the discovery of America or the establishment of
Copernican astronomy. A Scythian invasion was
scarcely less portentous to the Jews than the descent of
an irresistible army from the planet Jupiter would be
to the civilised nations of the nineteenth century. The
Jew began to shrink from intimate and familiar fellowship
with so mighty and mysterious a Deity. He felt
the need of a mediator, some less exalted being, to
stand between himself and God. For the ordinary
purposes of everyday life the Temple, with its ritual
and priesthood, provided a mediation; but for unforeseen
contingencies and exceptional crises the Jews
welcomed the belief that a ministry of angels provided
a safe means of intercourse between himself and the
Almighty. Many men have come to feel to-day that
the discoveries of science have made the universe so
infinite and marvellous that its Maker and Governor is
exalted beyond human approach. The infinite spaces
of the constellations seem to intervene between the
earth and the presence-chamber of God; its doors are
guarded against prayer and faith by inexorable laws;
the awful Being, who dwells within, has become
<q>unmeasured in height, undistinguished into form.</q>
Intellect and imagination alike fail to combine the
manifold and terrible attributes of the Author of nature
into the picture of a loving Father. It is no new
experience, and the present century faces the situation
very much as did the chronicler's contemporaries.
Some are happy enough to rest in the mediation of
ritual priests; others are content to recognise, as of
old, powers and forces, not now, however, personal
messengers of Jehovah, but the physical agencies of
<q>that which makes for righteousness.</q> Christ came
to supersede the Mosaic ritual and the ministry of
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
angels; He will come again to bring those who are far
off into renewed fellowship with His Father and theirs.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, the recognition of Satan, the evil
angel, marks an equally great change from the theology
of the book of Samuel. The primitive Israelite
religion had not yet reached the stage at which the
origin and existence of moral evil became an urgent
problem of religious thought; men had not yet
realised the logical consequences of the doctrine of
Divine unity and omnipotence. Not only was material
evil traced to Jehovah as the expression of His just
wrath against sin, but <q>morally pernicious acts were
quite frankly ascribed to the direct agency of God.</q><note place='foot'>Schultz, <hi rend='italic'>Old Testament Theology</hi>, ii. 270.</note>
God hardens the heart of Pharaoh and the Canaanites;
Saul is instigated by an evil spirit from Jehovah to
make an attempt upon the life of David; Jehovah
moves David to number Israel; He sends forth a
lying spirit that Ahab's prophets may prophesy falsely
and entice him to his ruin.<note place='foot'>Exod. iv. 21; Josh. xi. 20; 1 Sam. xix. 9, 10; 2 Sam. xxiv. 1;
1 Kings xxii. 20-23.</note> The Divine origin of
moral evil implied in these passages is definitely stated
in the book of Proverbs: <q>Jehovah hath made everything
for its own end, yea even the wicked for the day
of evil</q>; in Lamentations, <q>Out of the mouth of the
Most High cometh there not evil and good?</q> and in
the book of Isaiah, <q>I form the light, and create
darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I am Jehovah,
that doeth all these things.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. xvi. 4; Lam. iii. 38; Isa. xlv. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ultra-Calvinism, so to speak, of earlier Israelite
religion was only possible so long as its full significance
was not understood. An emphatic assertion of the
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
absolute sovereignty of the one God was necessary as
a protest against polytheism, and later on against
dualism as well. For practical purposes men's faith
needed to be protected by the assurance that God
worked out His purposes in and through human
wickedness. The earlier attitude of the Old Testament
towards moral evil had a distinct practical and theological
value.
</p>

<p>
But the conscience of Israel could not always rest
in this view of the origin of evil. As the standard of
morality was raised, and its obligations were more
fully insisted on, as men shrank from causing evil
themselves and from the use of deceit and violence,
they hesitated more and more to ascribe to Jehovah
what they sought to avoid themselves. And yet no
easy way of escape presented itself. The facts remained;
the temptation to do evil was part of the
punishment of the sinner and of the discipline of the
saint. It was impossible to deny that sin had its place
in God's government of the world; and in view of
men's growing reverence and moral sensitiveness, it
was becoming almost equally impossible to admit without
qualification or explanation that God was Himself
the Author of evil. Jewish thought found itself face
to face with the dilemma against which the human
intellect vainly beats its wings, like a bird against the
bars of its cage.
</p>

<p>
However, even in the older literature there were
suggestions, not indeed of a solution of the problem,
but of a less objectionable way of stating facts. In
Eden the temptation to evil comes from the serpent;
and, as the story is told, the serpent is quite independent
of God; and the question of any Divine authority
or permission for its action is not in any way dealt
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
with. It is true that the serpent was one of the beasts
of the field which the Lord God had made, but the narrator
probably did not consider the question of any Divine
responsibility for its wickedness. Again, when Ahab
is enticed to his ruin, Jehovah does not act directly, but
through the twofold agency first of the lying spirit
and then of the deluded prophets. This tendency to
dissociate God from any direct agency of evil is further
illustrated in Job and Zechariah. When Job is to be
tried and tempted, the actual agent is the malevolent
Satan; and the same evil spirit stands forth to accuse
the high-priest Joshua<note place='foot'>Zech. iii. 1.</note> as the representative of Israel.
The development of the idea of angelic agency afforded
new resources for the reverent exposition of the facts
connected with the origin and existence of moral evil.
If a sense of Divine majesty led to a recognition of the
angel of Jehovah as the Mediator of revelation, the
reverence for Divine holiness imperatively demanded
that the immediate causation of evil should also be
associated with angelic agency. This agent of evil
receives the name of Satan, the adversary of man, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>advocatus diaboli</foreign> who seeks to discredit man before God,
the impeacher of Job's loyalty and of Joshua's purity.
Yet Jehovah does not resign any of His omnipotence.
In Job Satan cannot act without God's permission; he
is strictly limited by Divine control: all that he does
only illustrates Divine wisdom and effects the Divine
purpose. In Zechariah there is no refutation of the
charge brought by Satan; its truth is virtually admitted:
nevertheless Satan is rebuked for his attempt to hinder
God's gracious purposes towards His people. Thus
later Jewish thought left the ultimate Divine sovereignty
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
untouched, but attributed the actual and direct causation
of moral evil to malign spiritual agency.
</p>

<p>
Trained in this school, the chronicler must have read
with something of a shock that Jehovah moved David
to commit the sin of numbering Israel. He was familiar
with the idea that in such matters Jehovah used or permitted
the activity of Satan. Accordingly he carefully
avoids reproducing any words from the book of Samuel
that imply a direct Divine temptation of David, and
ascribes it to the well-known and crafty animosity of
Satan against Israel. In so doing, he has gone somewhat
further than his predecessors: he is not careful
to emphasise any Divine permission given to Satan or
Divine control exercised over him. The subsequent
narrative implies an overruling for good, and the
chronicler may have expected his readers to understand
that Satan here stood in the same relation to
God as in Job and Zechariah; but the abrupt and
isolated introduction of Satan to bring about the fall of
David invests the arch-enemy with a new and more
independent dignity.
</p>

<p>
The progress of the Jews in moral and spiritual life
had given them a keener appreciation both of good
and evil, and of the contrast and opposition between
them. Over against the pictures of the good kings,
and of the angel of the Lord, the generation of the
chronicler set the complementary pictures of the wicked
kings and the evil angel. They had a higher ideal
to strive after, a clearer vision of the kingdom of
God; they also saw more vividly the depths of Satan
and recoiled with horror from the abyss revealed to
them.
</p>

<p>
Our text affords a striking illustration of the
tendency to emphasise the recognition of Satan as
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
the instrument of evil and to ignore the question of
the relation of God to the origin of evil. Possibly no
more practical attitude can be assumed towards this
difficult question. The absolute relation of evil to the
Divine sovereignty is one of the problems of the ultimate
nature of God and man. Its discussion may throw
many sidelights upon other subjects, and will always
serve the edifying and necessary purpose of teaching
men the limitations of their intellectual powers. Otherwise
theologians have found such controversies barren,
and the average Christian has not been able to derive
from them any suitable nourishment for his spiritual
life. Higher intelligences than our own, we have been
told,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 26'><q rend='pre'>... reasoned high</q></l>
<l>Of providence, foreknowledge, will, and fate,</l>
<l>Fixed fate, free-will, foreknowledge absolute,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On the other hand, it is supremely important that
the believer should clearly understand the reality of
temptation as an evil spiritual force opposed to Divine
grace. Sometimes this power of Satan will show itself
as <q>the alien law in his members, warring against the
law of his mind and bringing him into captivity under
the law of sin, which is in his members.</q> He will be
conscious that <q>he is drawn away by his own lust and
enticed.</q> But sometimes temptation will rather come
from the outside. A man will find his <q>adversary</q>
in circumstances, in evil companions, in <q>the sight of
means to do ill deeds</q>; the serpent whispers in his
ear, and Satan moves him to wrong-doing. Let him
not imagine for a moment that he is delivered over
to the powers of evil; let him realise clearly that with
every temptation God provides a way of escape. Every
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
man knows in his own conscience that speculative difficulties
can neither destroy the sanctity of moral obligation
nor hinder the operation of the grace of God.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, the chronicler is at one with the books of
Job and Zechariah in showing us the malice of Satan
overruled for man's good and God's glory. In Job the
affliction of the Patriarch only serves to bring out his
faith and devotion, and is eventually rewarded by
renewed and increased prosperity; in Zechariah the
protest of Satan against God's gracious purposes for
Israel is made the occasion of a singular display of
God's favour towards His people and their priest. In
Chronicles the malicious intervention of Satan leads up
to the building of the Temple.
</p>

<p>
Long ago Jehovah had promised to choose a place
in Israel wherein to set His name; but, as the chronicler
read in the history of his nation, the Israelites dwelt
for centuries in Palestine, and Jehovah made no
sign: the ark of God still dwelt in curtains. Those
who still looked for the fulfilment of this ancient
promise must often have wondered by what prophetic
utterance or vision Jehovah would make known His
choice. Bethel had been consecrated by the vision of
Jacob, when he was a solitary fugitive from Esau, paying
the penalty of his selfish craft; but the lessons of past
history are not often applied practically, and probably no
one ever expected that Jehovah's choice of the site for
His one temple would be made known to His chosen
king, the first true Messiah of Israel, in a moment of
even deeper humiliation than Jacob's, or that the Divine
announcement would be the climax of a series of events
initiated by the successful machinations of Satan.
</p>

<p>
Yet herein lies one of the main lessons of the incident.
Satan's machinations are not really successful;
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
he often attains his immediate object, but is always
defeated in the end. He estranges David from Jehovah
for a moment, but eventually Jehovah and His people
are drawn into closer union, and their reconciliation is
sealed by the long-expected choice of a site for the
Temple. Jehovah is like a great general, who will
sometimes allow the enemy to obtain a temporary
advantage, in order to overwhelm him in some crushing
defeat. The eternal purpose of God moves onward,
unresting and unhasting; its quiet and irresistible persistence
finds special opportunity in the hindrances
that seem sometimes to check its progress. In David's
case a few months showed the whole process complete:
the malice of the Enemy; the sin and punishment of his
unhappy victim; the Divine relenting and its solemn
symbol in the newly consecrated altar. But with the
Lord one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand
years as one day; and this brief episode in the history
of a small people is a symbol alike of the eternal dealings
of God in His government of the universe and of His
personal care for the individual soul. How short-lived
has been the victory of sin in many souls! Sin is
triumphant; the tempter seems to have it all his own
way, but his first successes only lead to his final
rout; the devil is cast out by the Divine exorcism of
chastisement and forgiveness; and he learns that his
efforts have been made to subserve the training in the
Christian warfare of such warriors as Augustine and
John Bunyan. Or, to take a case more parallel to
that of David, Satan catches the saint unawares, and
entraps him into sin; and, behold, while the evil one
is in the first flush of triumph, his victim is back
again at the throne of grace in an agony of contrition,
and before long the repentant sinner is bowed down
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
into a new humility at the undeserved graciousness of
the Divine pardon: the chains of love are riveted with
a fuller constraint about his soul, and he is tenfold more
the child of God than before.
</p>

<p>
And in the larger life of the Church and the world
Satan's triumphs are still the heralds of his utter
defeat. He prompted the Jews to slay Stephen; and
the Church were scattered abroad, and went about
preaching the word; and the young man at whose feet
the witnesses laid down their garments became the
Apostle of the Gentiles. He tricked the reluctant
Diocletian into ordering the greatest of the persecutions,
and in a few years Christianity was an established
religion in the empire. In more secular matters the
apparent triumph of an evil principle is usually the
signal for its downfall. In America the slave-holders
of the Southern States rode rough-shod over the
Northerners for more than a generation, and then came
the Civil War.
</p>

<p>
These are not isolated instances, and they serve to
warn us against undue depression and despondency
when for a season God seems to refrain from any
intervention with some of the evils of the world. We
are apt to ask in our impatience,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Is there not wrong too bitter for atoning?</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>What are these desperate and hideous years?</l>
<l>Hast Thou not heard Thy whole creation groaning,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Sighs of the bondsman, and a woman's tears?</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The works of Satan are as earthly as they are devilish;
they belong to the world; which passeth away, with the
lust thereof: but the gracious providence of God has all
infinity and all eternity to work in. Where to-day we
can see nothing but the destroying angel with his
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
flaming sword, future generations shall behold the
temple of the Lord.
</p>

<p>
David's sin, and penitence, and pardon were no
inappropriate preludes to this consecration of Mount
Moriah. The Temple was not built for the use of
blameless saints, but the worship of ordinary men and
women. Israel through countless generations was to
bring the burden of its sins to the altar of Jehovah.
The sacred splendour of Solomon's dedication festival
duly represented the national dignity of Israel and the
majesty of the God of Jacob; but the self-abandonment
of David's repentance, the deliverance of Jerusalem
from impending pestilence, the Divine pardon of
presumptuous sin, constituted a still more solemn
inauguration of the place where Jehovah had chosen
to set His name. The sinner, seeking the assurance
of pardon in atoning sacrifice, would remember how
David had then received pardon for his sin, and how
the acceptance of his offerings had been the signal for
the disappearance of the destroying angel. So in the
Middle Ages penitents founded churches to expiate
their sins. Such sanctuaries would symbolise to sinners
in after-times the possibility of forgiveness; they were
monuments of God's mercy as well as of the founders'
penitence. To-day churches, both in fabric and fellowship,
have been made sacred for individual worshippers
because in them the Spirit of God has moved them to
repentance and bestowed upon them the assurance of
pardon. Moreover, this solemn experience consecrates
for God His most acceptable temples in the souls of
those that love Him.
</p>

<p>
One other lesson is suggested by the happy issues of
Satan's malign interference in the history of Israel as
understood by the chronicler. The inauguration of the
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
new altar was a direct breach of the Levitical law, and
involved the superseding of the altar and tabernacle that
had hitherto been the only legitimate sanctuary for the
worship of Jehovah. Thus the new order had its origin
in the violation of existing ordinances and the neglect
of an ancient sanctuary. Its early history constituted
a declaration of the transient character of sanctuaries
and systems of ritual. God would not eternally limit
himself to any building, or His grace to the observance
of any forms of external ritual. Long before the
chronicler's time Jeremiah had proclaimed this lesson
in the ears of Judah: <q>Go ye now unto My place
which was in Shiloh, where I caused My name to dwell
at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness
of My people Israel.... I will do unto the house
which is called by My name, wherein ye trust, and unto
the place which I gave to you and your fathers, as I
have done to Shiloh.... I will make this house like
Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations
of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. vii. 12-14; xxvi. 6.</note> In the Tabernacle all things were made
according to the pattern that was showed to Moses in
the mount; for the Temple David was made to understand
the pattern of all things <q>in writing from the
hand of Jehovah.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxviii. 19.</note> If the Tabernacle could be set
aside for the Temple, the Temple might in its turn give
place to the universal Church. If God allowed David
in his great need to ignore the one legitimate altar of
the Tabernacle and to sacrifice without its officials, the
faithful Israelite might be encouraged to believe that
in extreme emergency Jehovah would accept his offering
without regard to place or priest.
</p>

<p>
The principles here involved are of very wide application.
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
Every ecclesiastical system was at first a new
departure. Even if its highest claims be admitted,
they simply assert that within historic times God set
aside some other system previously enjoying the
sanction of His authority, and substituted for it a more
excellent way. The Temple succeeded the Tabernacle;
the synagogue appropriated in a sense part of
the authority of the Temple; the Church superseded
both synagogue and Temple. God's action in authorising
each new departure warrants the expectation that
He may yet sanction new ecclesiastical systems; the
authority which is sufficient to establish is also adequate
to supersede. When the Anglican Church broke
away from the unity of Western Christendom by
denying the supremacy of the Pope and refusing to
recognise the orders of other Protestant Churches, she
set an example of dissidence that was naturally followed
by the Presbyterians and Independents. The revolt
of the Reformers against the theology of their day in
a measure justifies those who have repudiated the
dogmatic systems of the Reformed Churches. In these
and in other ways to claim freedom from authority,
even in order to set up a new authority of one's own,
involves in principle at least the concession to others of
a similar liberty of revolt against one's self.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. Conclusion.</head>

<p>
In dealing with the various subjects of this book, we
have reserved for separate treatment their relation
to the Messianic hopes of the Jews and to the realisation
of these hopes in Christ. The Messianic teaching
of Chronicles is only complete when we collect and
combine the noblest traits in its pictures of David and
Solomon, of prophets, priests, and kings. We cannot
ascribe to Chronicles any great influence on the subsequent
development of the Jewish idea of the Messiah.
In the first place, the chronicler does not point out the
bearing which his treatment of history has upon the
expectation of a future deliverer. He has no formal
intention of describing the character and office of the
Messiah; he merely wishes to write a history so as to
emphasise the facts which most forcibly illustrated the
sacred mission of Israel. And, in the second place,
Chronicles never exercised any great influence over
Jewish thought, and never attained to anything like the
popularity of the books of Samuel and Kings. Many
circumstances conspired to prevent the Temple ministry
from obtaining an undivided authority over later
Judaism. The growth of their power was broken in
upon by the persecutions of Antiochus and the wars
of the Maccabees. The ministry of the Temple under
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
the Maccabæan high-priests must have been very
different from that to which the chronicler belonged.
Even if the priests and Levites still exercised any
influence upon theology, they were overshadowed by
the growing importance of the rabbinical schools of
Babylon and Palestine. Moreover, the rise of Hellenistic
Judaism and the translation of the Scriptures
into Greek introduced another new and potent factor
into the development of the Jewish religion. Of all the
varied forces that were at work few or none tended to
assign any special authority to Chronicles, nor has it
left any very marked traces on later literature. Josephus
indeed uses it for his history, but the New Testament
is under very slight obligation to our author.
</p>

<p>
But Chronicles reveals to us the position and tendencies
of Jewish thought in the interval between
Ezra and the Maccabees. The Messiah was expected
to renew the ancient glories of the chosen people,
<q>to restore the kingdom to Israel</q>; we learn from
Chronicles what sort of a kingdom He was to restore.
We see the features of the ancient monarchy that
were dear to the memories of the Jews, the characters
of the prophets, priests, and kings whom they delighted
to honour. As their ideas of the past shaped and
coloured their hopes for the future, their conception of
what was noblest and best in the history of the monarchy
was at the same time the measure of what they expected
in the Messiah. However little influence Chronicles
may have exerted as a piece of literature, the tendencies
of which it is a monument continued to leaven the
thought of Israel, and are everywhere manifest in the
New Testament.
</p>

<p>
We have to bear in mind that Messiah, <q>Anointed,</q>
was the familiar title of the Israelite kings; its use
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
for the priests was late and secondary. The use of a
royal title to denote the future Saviour of the nation
shows us that He was primarily conceived of as an
ideal king; and apart from any formal enunciation of
this conception, the title itself would exercise a controlling
influence upon the development of the Messianic
idea. Accordingly in the New Testament we find that
the Jews were looking for a king; and Jesus calls His
new society the Kingdom of Heaven.
</p>

<p>
But for the chronicler the Messiah, the Anointed of
Jehovah, is no mere secular prince. We have seen
how the chronicler tends to include religious duties
and prerogatives among the functions of the king.
David and Solomon and their pious successors are
supreme alike in Church and state as the earthly
representatives of Jehovah. The actual titles of priest
and prophet are not bestowed upon the kings, but
they are virtually priests in their care for and control
over the buildings and ritual of the Temple, and they
are prophets when, like David and Solomon, they hold
direct fellowship with Jehovah and announce His will
to the people. Moreover, David, as <q>the Psalmist of
Israel,</q> had become the inspired interpreter of the
religious experience of the Jews. The ancient idea
of the king as the victorious conqueror was gradually
giving place to a more spiritual conception of his office;
the Messiah was becoming more and more a definitely
religious personage. Thus Chronicles prepared the
way for the acceptance of Christ as a spiritual Deliverer,
who was not only King, but also Priest and Prophet.
In fact, we may claim the chronicler's own implied
authority for including in the picture of the coming
King the characteristics he ascribes to the priest and
the prophet. Thus the Messiah of Chronicles is
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
distinctly more spiritual and less secular than the
Messiah of popular Jewish enthusiasm in our Lord's
own time. Whereas in the chronicler's time the
tendency was to spiritualise the idea of the king, the
tenure of the office of high-priest by the Maccabæan
princes tended rather to secularise the priesthood and
to restore older and cruder conceptions of the Messianic
King.
</p>

<p>
Let us see how the chronicler's history of the house
of David illustrates the person and work of the Son
of David, who came to restore the ancient monarchy
in the spiritual kingdom of which it was the symbol.
The Gospels introduce our Lord very much as the
chronicler introduces David: they give us His genealogy,
and pass almost immediately to His public ministry.
Of His training and preparation for that ministry, of
the chain of earthly circumstances that determined the
time and method of His entry upon the career of a
public Teacher, they tell us next to nothing. We are
only allowed one brief glimpse of the life of the holy
Child; our attention is mainly directed to the royal
Saviour when He has entered upon His kingdom;
and His Divine nature finds expression in mature
manhood, when none of the limitations of childhood
detract from the fulness of His redeeming service and
sacrifice.
</p>

<p>
The authority of Christ rests on the same basis as
that of the ancient kings: it is at once human and
Divine. In Christ indeed this twofold authority is in
one sense peculiar to Himself; but in the practical
application of His authority to the hearts and consciences
of men He treads in the footsteps of His
ancestors. His kingdom rests on His own Divine
commission and on the consent of His subjects. God
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
has given Him the right to rule, but He will not reign
in any heart till He receives its free submission. And
still, as of old, Christ, thus chosen and well beloved of
God and man, is King over the whole life of His people,
and claims to rule over them in their homes, their
business, their recreation, their social and political life,
as well as in their public and private worship. If
David and his pious successors were devoted to Jehovah
and His temple, if they protected their people from
foreign foes and wisely administered the affairs of
Israel, Christ sets us the example of perfect obedience
to the Father; He gives us deliverance and victory
in our warfare against principalities and powers, against
the world rulers of this darkness, and against the
spiritual hosts of wickedness in heavenly places; He
administers in peace and holiness the inner kingdom
of the believing heart. All that was foreshadowed
both by David and Solomon is realised in Christ. The
warlike David is a symbol of the holy warfare of Christ
and the Church militant, of Him who came not to send
peace on earth, but a sword; Solomon is the symbol
of Christ, the Prince of peace in the Church triumphant.
The tranquillity and splendour of the reign of the first
son of David are types of the serene glory of Christ's
kingdom as it is partly realised in the hearts of His
children and as it will be fully realised in heaven; the
God-given wisdom of Solomon prefigures the perfect
knowledge and understanding of Him who is Himself
the Word and Wisdom of God.
</p>

<p>
The shadows that darken the history of the kings
of Judah and even the life of David himself remind
us that the Messiah moved upon a far higher moral
and spiritual level than the monarchs whose royal
dignity was a type of His own. Like David, He
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
was exposed to the machinations of Satan; but, unlike
David, He successfully resisted the tempter. He was
in <q>all points tempted like as we are, yet without
sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
The great priestly work of David and Solomon was
the building of the Temple and the organisation of
its ritual and ministry. By this work the kings made
splendid provision for fellowship between Jehovah and
His people, and for the system of sacrifices, whereby
a sinful nation expressed their penitence and received
the assurance of forgiveness. This has been the
supreme work of Christ: through Him we have access
to God; we enter into the holy place, into the Divine
presence, by a new and living way, that is to say His
flesh; He has brought us into the perpetual fellowship
of the Spirit. And whereas Solomon could only build
one temple, to which the believer paid occasional visits
and obtained the sense of Divine fellowship through
the ministry of the priests, Christ makes every faithful
heart the temple of sacred service, and He has offered
for us the one sacrifice, and provides a universal
atonement.
</p>

<p>
In His priesthood, as in His sacrifice, He represents
us before God, and this representation is not merely
technical and symbolic: in Him we find ourselves
brought near to God, and our desires and aspirations
are presented as petitions at the throne of the heavenly
grace. But, on the other hand, in His love and
righteousness He represents God to us, and brings the
assurance of our acceptance.
</p>

<p>
Other minor features of the office and rights of the
priests and Levites find a parallel in Christ. He also
is our Teacher and our Judge; to Him and to His
service all worldly wealth may be consecrated. Christ
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
is in all things the spiritual Heir of the house of Aaron
as well as of the house of David; because He is
a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek, He,
like Melchizedek, is also King of Salem; of His kingdom
and of His priesthood there shall be no end. But while
Christ is to the Kingdom of Heaven what David was
to the Israelite monarchy, while in the different aspects
of His work He is at once Temple, Priest, and Sacrifice,
yet in the ministry of His earthly life He is above
all a Prophet, the supreme successor of Elijah and
Isaiah. It was only in a figure that He sat upon
David's throne; it formed no part of His plan to
exercise earthly dominion: His kingdom was not of this
world. He did not belong to the priestly tribe, and
performed none of the external acts of priestly ritual;
He did not base His authority upon any genealogy
with regard to priesthood, as the Epistle to the Hebrews
says, <q>It is evident that our Lord hath sprung out
of Judah, as to which tribe Moses spake nothing
concerning priests.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. vii. 14.</note> His royal birth had its symbolic
value, but He never asked men to believe in Him
because of His human descent from David. He relied
as little on the authority of office as on that of birth.
Officially He was neither scribe nor rabbi. Like the
prophets, His only authority was His Divine commission
and the witness of the Spirit in the hearts
of His hearers. The people recognised Him as a
prophet; they took Him for Elijah or one of the
prophets; He spoke of Himself as a prophet: <q>Not
without honour, save in his own country.</q> We
have seen that, while the priests ministered to the
regular and recurring needs of the people, the Divine
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
guidance in special emergencies and the Divine
authority for new departures were given by the
prophets. By a prophet Jehovah brought Israel out
of Egypt,<note place='foot'>Hos. xii. 13.</note> and Christ as a Prophet led His people out
of the bondage of the Law into the liberty of the
Gospel. By Him the Divine authority was given for
the greatest religious revolution that the world has
ever seen. And still He is the Prophet of the Church.
He does not merely provide for the religious wants
that are common to every race and to every generation:
as the circumstances of His Church altar, and the
believer is confronted with fresh difficulties and called
upon to undertake new tasks, Christ reveals to His
people the purpose and counsel of God. Even the
record of His earthly teaching is constantly found to
have anticipated the needs of our own time; His Spirit
enables us to discover fresh applications of the truths
He taught: and through Him special light is sought
and granted for the guidance of individuals and of the
Church in their need.
</p>

<p>
But in Chronicles special stress is laid on the darker
aspects of the work of the prophets. They constantly
appear to administer rebukes and announce coming
punishment. Both Christ and His apostles were
compelled to assume the same attitude towards Israel.
Like Jeremiah, their hearts sank under the burden
of so stern a duty. Christ denounced the Pharisees,
and wept over the city that knew not the things
belonging to its peace; He declared the impending
ruin of the Temple and the Holy City. Even so His
Spirit still rebukes sin, and warns the impenitent of
inevitable punishment.
</p>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<p>
We have seen also in Chronicles that no stress was
laid on any material rewards for the prophets, and that
their fidelity was sometimes recompensed with persecution
and death. Like Christ Himself, they had nothing
to do with priestly wealth and splendour. The silence
of the chronicler to the income of these prophets makes
them fitting types of Him who had not where to lay
His head. A discussion of the income of Christ would
almost savour of blasphemy; we should shrink from
inquiring how far <q>those who derived spiritual profit
from His teaching gave Him substantial proofs of their
appreciation of His ministry.</q> Christ's recompense at
the hands of the world and of the Jewish Church
was that which former prophets had received. Like
Zechariah the son of Jehoiada, He was persecuted
and slain; He delivered a prophet's message, and died
a prophet's death.
</p>

<p>
But, besides the chronicler's treatment of the offices
of prophet, priest, and king, there was another feature of
his teaching which would prepare the way for a clear
comprehension of the person and work of Christ. We
have noticed how the growing sense of the power and
majesty of Jehovah seemed to set Him at a distance
from man, and how the Jews welcomed the idea of the
mediation of an angelic ministry. And yet the angels
were too vague and unfamiliar, too little known, and
too imperfectly understood to satisfy men's longing for
some means of fellowship between themselves and the
remote majesty of an almighty God; while still their
ministry served to maintain faith in the possibility
of mediation, and to quicken the yearning after some
better way of access to Jehovah. When Christ came
He found this faith and yearning waiting to be satisfied;
they opened a door through which Christ found
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
His way into hearts prepared to receive Him. In Him
the familiar human figures of priest and prophet were
exalted into the supernatural dignity of the Angel of
Jehovah. Men had long strained their eyes in vain to
a far-off heaven; and, behold, a human voice recalled
their gaze to the earth; and they turned and found God
beside them, kindly and accessible, a Man with men.
They realised the promise that a modern poet puts into
David's mouth:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'><q rend='pre'>... O Saul, it shall be</q></l>
<l>A face like my face that receives thee; a Man like to me</l>
<l>Thou shalt love and be loved by for ever; a Hand like this hand</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Shall throw open the gates of new life to thee! See the Christ stand!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
We have thus seen how the figures of the chronicler's
history&mdash;prophet, priest, king, and angel&mdash;were types
and foreshadowings of Christ. We may sum up this
aspect of his teaching by a quotation from a modern
exponent of Old Testament theology:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Moses the prophet is the first type of the Mediator.
By his side stands Aaron the priest, who connects the
people with God, and consecrates it.... But from
the time of David both these figures pale in the
imagination of the people before the picture of the
Davidic king. His is the figure which appears the
most indispensable condition of all true happiness for
Israel. David is the third and by far the most perfect
type of the Consummator.</q><note place='foot'>Schultz, <hi rend='italic'>Old Testament Theology</hi>, ii. 353.</note>
</p>

<p>
This recurrence to the king as the most perfect type
of the Redeemer suggests a last application of the
Messianic teaching of the chronicler. In discussing his
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
pictures of the kings, we have ventured to give them a
meaning adapted to modern political life. In Israel the
king stood for the state. When a community combined
for common action to erect a temple or repel an invader,
the united force was controlled and directed by the
king; he was the symbol of national union and
co-operation. To-day, when a community acts as a
whole, its agent and instrument is the civil government;
the state is the people organised for the common good,
subordinating individual ends to the welfare of the
whole nation. Where the Old Testament has <q>king,</q>
its modern equivalent may read the state or the civil
government,&mdash;nay, even for special purposes the municipality,
the county council, or the school board. Shall
we obtain any helpful or even intelligible result if we
apply this method of translation to the doctrine of
the Messiah? Externally at any rate the translation
bears a startling likeness to what has been regarded
as a specially modern development. <q>Israel looked
for salvation from the king,</q> would read, <q>Modern
society should seek salvation from the state.</q> Assuredly
there are many prophets who have taken up
this burden without any idea that their new heresy
was only a reproduction of old and forgotten orthodoxy.
But the history of the growth of the Messianic idea
supplies a correction to the primitive baldness of this
principle of salvation by the state. In time the picture
of the Messianic king came to include the attributes of
the prophet and the priest. If we care to complete our
modern application, we must affirm that the state can
never be a saviour till it becomes sensitive to Divine
influences and conscious of a Divine presence.
</p>

<p>
When we see how the Messianic hope of Israel was
purified and ennobled to receive a fulfilment glorious
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
beyond its wildest dreams, we are encouraged to
believe that the fantastic visions of the Socialist may be
divinely guided to some reasonable ideal and may
prepare the way for some further manifestation of the
grace of God. But the Messianic state, like the Messiah,
may be called upon to suffer and die for the salvation
of the world, that it may receive a better resurrection.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book IV. The Interpretation Of History.</head>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Last Prayer Of David. 1 Chron. xxix. 10-19.</head>

<p>
In order to do justice to the chronicler's method of
presenting us with a number of very similar
illustrations of the same principle, we have in the
previous book grouped much of his material under a
few leading subjects. There remains the general
thread of the history, which is, of course, very much
the same in Chronicles as in the book of Kings, and
need not be dwelt on at any length. At the same time
some brief survey is necessary for the sake of completeness
and in order to bring out the different
complexion given to the history by the chronicler's
alterations and omissions. Moreover, there are a
number of minor points that are most conveniently
dealt with in the course of a running exposition.
</p>

<p>
The special importance attached by the chronicler
to David and Solomon has enabled us to treat their
reigns at length in discussing his picture of the ideal
king; and similarly the reign of Ahaz has served as an
illustration of the character and fortunes of the wicked
kings. We therefore take up the history at the
accession of Rehoboam, and shall simply indicate very
briefly the connection of the reign of Ahaz with what
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
precedes and follows. But before passing on to
Rehoboam we must consider <q>The Last Prayer of
David,</q> a devotional paragraph peculiar to Chronicles.
The detailed exposition of this passage would have
been out of proportion in a brief sketch of the
chronicler's account of the character and reign of
David, and would have had no special bearing on the
subject of the ideal king. On the other hand, the
<q>Prayer</q> states some of the leading principles which
govern the chronicler in his interpretation of the
history of Israel; and its exposition forms a suitable
introduction to the present division of our subject.
</p>

<p>
The occasion of this prayer was the great closing
scene of David's life, which we have already described.
The prayer is a thanksgiving for the assurance David
had received that the accomplishment of the great
purpose of his life, the erection of a temple to Jehovah,
was virtually secured. He had been permitted to
collect the materials for the building, he had received
the plans of the Temple from Jehovah, and had placed
them in the willing hands of his successor. The
princes and the people had caught his own enthusiasm
and lavishly supplemented the bountiful provision
already made for the future work. Solomon had been
accepted as king by popular acclamation. Every
possible preparation had been made that could be made,
and the aged king poured out his heart in praise to God
for His grace and favour.
</p>

<p>
The prayer falls naturally into four subdivisions:
vv. 10-13 are a kind of doxology in honour of Jehovah;
in vv. 14-16 David acknowledges that Israel is entirely
dependent upon Jehovah for the means of rendering
Him acceptable service; in ver. 17 he claims that he
and his people have offered willingly unto Jehovah; and
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
in vv. 18 and 19 he prays that Solomon and the
people may build the Temple and abide in the Law.
</p>

<p>
In the doxology God is addressed as <q>Jehovah, the
God of Israel, our Father,</q> and similarly in ver. 18
as <q>Jehovah, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Israel.</q> For the chronicler the accession of David is
the starting-point of Israelite history and religion, but
here, as in the genealogies, he links his narrative to
that of the Pentateuch, and reminds his readers that
the crowning dispensation of the worship of Jehovah
in the Temple rested on the earlier revelations to
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel.
</p>

<p>
We are at once struck by the divergence from the
usual formula: <q>Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.</q> Moreover,
when God is referred to as the God of the Patriarch
personally, the usual phrase is <q>the God of Jacob.</q>
The formula, <q>God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel,</q>
occurs again in Chronicles in the account of Hezekiah's
reformation; it only occurs elsewhere in the history of
Elijah in the book of Kings.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxx. 6; 1 Kings xviii. 36.</note> The chronicler avoids
the use of the name <q>Jacob,</q> and for the most part calls
the Patriarch <q>Israel.</q> <q>Jacob</q> only occurs in two
poetic quotations, where its omission was almost impossible,
because in each case <q>Israel</q> is used in the
parallel clause.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xvi. 13, 17; Gen. xxxii. 28.</note> This choice of names is an application of
the same principle that led to the omission of the discreditable
incidents in the history of David and Solomon.
Jacob was the supplanter. The name suggested the
unbrotherly craft of the Patriarch. It was not desirable
that the Jews should be encouraged to think of Jehovah
as the God of a grasping and deceitful man. Jehovah
was the God of the Patriarch's nobler nature and
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
higher life, the God of Israel, who strove with God
and prevailed.
</p>

<p>
In the doxology that follows the resources of language
are almost exhausted in the attempt to set forth
adequately <q>the greatness, and the power, and the
glory, and the victory, and the majesty, ... the riches
and honour, ... the power and might,</q> of Jehovah.
These verses read like an expansion of the simple
Christian doxology, <q>Thine is the kingdom, the power,
and the glory,</q> but in all probability the latter is an
abbreviation from our text. In both there is the same
recognition of the ruling omnipotence of God; but the
chronicler, having in mind the glory and power of
David and his magnificent offerings for the building
of the Temple, is specially careful to intimate that
Jehovah is the source of all worldly greatness: <q>Both
riches and honour come of Thee, ... and in Thy hand
it is to make great and to give strength unto all.</q>
</p>

<p>
The complementary truth, the entire dependence of
Israel on Jehovah, is dealt with in the next verses.
David has learnt humility from the tragic consequences
of his fatal census; his heart is no longer uplifted with
pride at the wealth and glory of his kingdom; he claims
no credit for the spontaneous impulse of generosity
that prompted his munificence. Everything is traced
back to Jehovah: <q>All things come of Thee, and of
Thine own have we given Thee.</q> Before, when David
contemplated the vast population of Israel and the great
array of his warriors, the sense of God's displeasure
fell upon him; now, when the riches and honour of
his kingdom were displayed before him, he may have
felt the chastening influence of his former experience.
A touch of melancholy darkened his spirit for a moment;
standing upon the brink of the dim, mysterious Sheol,
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
he found small comfort in barbaric abundance of timber
and stone, jewels, talents, and darics; he saw the emptiness
of all earthly splendour. Like Abraham before
the children of Heth, he stood before Jehovah a
stranger and a sojourner.<note place='foot'>Gen. xxiii. 4; cf. Psalms xxxix. 13, cxix. 19.</note> Bildad the Shuhite had
urged Job to submit himself to the teaching of a venerable
orthodoxy, because <q>we are of yesterday and
know nothing, because our days upon earth are a
shadow.</q><note place='foot'>Job viii. 9.</note> The same thought made David feel his
insignificance, in spite of his wealth and royal dominion:
<q>Our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there
no abiding.</q>
</p>

<p>
He turns from these sombre thoughts to the consoling
reflection that in all his preparations he has
been the instrument of a Divine purpose, and has
served Jehovah willingly. To-day he can approach
God with a clear conscience: <q>I know also, my God,
that Thou triest the heart and hast pleasure in uprightness.
As for me, in the uprightness of my heart I
have willingly offered all these things.</q> He rejoiced,
moreover, that the people had offered willingly. The
chronicler anticipates the teaching of St. Paul that
<q>the Lord loveth a cheerful giver.</q> David gives of
his abundance in the same spirit in which the widow
gave her mite. The two narratives are mutually supplementary.
It is possible to apply the story of the
widow's mite so as to suggest that God values our
offerings in inverse proportion to their amount. We
are reminded by the willing munificence of David that
the rich may give of his abundance as simply and
humbly and as acceptably as the poor man gives of
his poverty.
</p>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<p>
But however grateful David might be for the pious
and generous spirit by which his people were now
possessed, he did not forget that they could only
abide in that spirit by the continued enjoyment of
Divine help and grace. His thanksgiving concludes
with prayer. Spiritual depression is apt to follow very
speedily in the train of spiritual exaltation; days of
joy and light are granted to us that we may make
provision for future necessity.
</p>

<p>
David does not merely ask that Israel may be kept
in external obedience and devotion: his prayer goes
deeper. He knows that out of the heart are the issues
of life, and he prays that the heart of Solomon and the
thoughts of the heart of the people may be kept right
with God. Unless the fountain of life were pure, it
would be useless to cleanse the stream. David's
special desire is that the Temple may be built, but
this desire is only the expression of his loyalty to the
Law. Without the Temple the commandments, and
testimonies, and statutes of the Law could not be rightly
observed. But he does not ask that the people may
be constrained to build the Temple and keeping the
Law in order that their hearts may be made perfect;
their hearts are to be made perfect that they may keep
the Law.
</p>

<p>
Henceforward throughout his history the chronicler's
criterion of a perfect heart, a righteous life, in king
and people, is their attitude towards the Law and the
Temple. Because their ordinances and worship formed
the accepted standard of religion and morality, through
which men's goodness would naturally express themselves.
Similarly only under a supreme sense of duty
to God and man may the Christian willingly violate
the established canons of religious and social life.
</p>

<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>

<p>
We may conclude by noticing a curious feature in
the wording of David's prayer. In the nineteenth, as in
the first, verse of this chapter the Temple, according to
our English versions, is referred to as <q>the palace.</q>
The original word <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>bîrâ</foreign> is probably Persian, though a
parallel form is quoted from the Assyrian. As a
Hebrew word it belongs to the latest and most corrupt
stage of the language as found in the Old Testament;
and only occurs in Chronicles, Nehemiah, Esther, and
Daniel. In putting this word into the mouth of David,
the chronicler is guilty of an anachronism, parallel to
his use of the word <q>darics.</q> The word <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>bîrâ</foreign> appears
to have first become familiar to the Jews as the name
of a Persian palace or fortress in Susa; it is used in
Nehemiah of the castle attached to the Temple, and in
later times the derivative Greek name <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Baris</foreign> had the
same meaning. It is curious to find the chronicler, in
his effort to find a sufficiently dignified title for the
temple of Jehovah, driven to borrow a word which
belonged originally to the royal magnificence of a
heathen empire, and which was used later on to denote
the fortress whence a Roman garrison controlled the
fanaticism of Jewish worship.<note place='foot'>Called, however, at that time Antonia.</note> The chronicler's intention,
no doubt, was to intimate that the dignity of
the Temple surpassed that of any royal palace. He
could not suppose that it was greater in extent or constructed
of more costly materials; the living presence
of Jehovah was its one supreme and unique distinction.
The King gave honour to His dwelling-place.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Rehoboam And Abijah: The Importance
Of Ritual. 2 Chron. x.-xiii.</head>

<p>
The transition from Solomon to Rehoboam brings
to light a serious drawback of the chronicler's
principle of selection. In the history of Solomon we
read of nothing but wealth, splendour, unchallenged
dominion, and superhuman wisdom; and yet the
breath is hardly out of the body of the wisest and
greatest king of Israel before his empire falls to pieces.
We are told, as in the book of Kings, that the people
met Rehoboam with a demand for release from <q>the
grievous service of thy father,</q> and yet we were
expressly told only two chapters before that <q>of the
children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his
work; but they were men of war, and chief of his
captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen.</q><note place='foot'>viii. 9.</note>
Rehoboam apparently had been left by the
wisdom of his father to the companionship of head-strong
and featherbrained youths; he followed their
advice rather than that of Solomon's grey-headed
counsellors, with the result that the ten tribes
successfully revolted and chose Jeroboam for their
king. Rehoboam assembled an army to reconquer his
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
lost territory, but Jehovah through the prophet
Shemaiah forbade him to make war against Jeroboam.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler here and elsewhere shows his
anxiety not to perplex simple minds with unnecessary
difficulties. They might be harassed and disturbed
by the discovery that the king, who built the Temple
and was specially endowed with Divine wisdom, had
fallen into grievous sin and been visited with condign
punishment. Accordingly everything that discredits
Solomon and detracts from his glory is omitted. The
general principle is sound; an earnest teacher, alive to
his responsibility, will not wantonly obtrude difficulties
upon his hearers; when silence does not involve
disloyalty to truth, he will be willing that they should
remain in ignorance of some of the more mysterious
dealings of God in nature and history. But silence
was more possible and less dangerous in the chronicler's
time than in the nineteenth century. He could
count upon a docile and submissive spirit in his
readers; they would not inquire beyond what they were
told: they would not discover the difficulties for themselves.
Jewish youths were not exposed to the attacks
of eager and militant sceptics, who would force these
difficulties upon their notice in an exaggerated form,
and at once demand that they should cease to believe
in anything human or Divine.
</p>

<p>
And yet, though the chronicler had great advantages
in this matter, his own narrative illustrates the narrow
limits within which the principle of the suppression of
difficulties can be safely applied. His silence as to
Solomon's sins and misfortunes makes the revolt
of the ten tribes utterly inexplicable. After the
account of the perfect wisdom, peace, and prosperity of
Solomon's reign, the revolt comes upon an intelligent
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
reader with a shock of surprise and almost of incredulity.
If he could not test the chronicler's narrative
by that of the book of Kings&mdash;and it was no part of
the chronicler's purpose that his history should be
thus tested&mdash;the violent transition from Solomon's
unbroken prosperity to the catastrophe of the disruption
would leave the reader quite uncertain as to
the general credibility of Chronicles. In avoiding
Scylla, our author has fallen into Charybdis; he has
suppressed one set of difficulties only to create others.
If we wish to help intelligent inquirers and to aid
them to form an independent judgment, our safest plan
will often be to tell them all we know ourselves and to
believe that difficulties, which in no way mar our
spiritual life, will not destroy their faith.
</p>

<p>
In the next section<note place='foot'>xi. 5-xii. 1, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> the chronicler tells how for
three years Rehoboam administered his diminished
kingdom with wisdom and success; he and his people
walked in the way of David and Solomon, and his
kingdom was established, and he was strong. He
fortified fifteen cities in Judah and Benjamin, and put
captains in them, and store of victuals, and oil and
wine, and shields and spears, and made them exceeding
strong. Rehoboam was further strengthened by
deserters from the northern kingdom. Though the
Pentateuch and the book of Joshua assigned to the
priests and Levites cities in the territory held by
Jeroboam, yet their intimate association with the
Temple rendered it impossible for them to remain
citizens of a state hostile to Jerusalem. The chronicler
indeed tells us that <q>Jeroboam and his sons cast them
off, that they should not execute the priest's office unto
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
Jehovah, and appointed others to be priests for the
high places and the he-goats and for the calves which
he had.</q> It is difficult to understand what the chronicler
means by this statement. On the face of it, we
should suppose that Jeroboam refused to employ the
house of Aaron and the tribe of Levi for the worship
of his he-goats and calves, but the chronicler could not
describe such action as casting <q>them off that they
should not execute the priest's office unto Jehovah.</q>
The passage has been explained to mean that Jeroboam
sought to hinder them from exercising their functions
at the Temple by preventing them from visiting Judah;
but to confine the priests and Levites to his own
kingdom would have been a strange way of casting
them off. However, whether driven out by Jeroboam
or escaping from him, they came to Jerusalem and
brought with them from among the ten tribes other
pious Israelites, who were attached to the worship of
the Temple. Judah and Jerusalem became the home
of all true worshippers of Jehovah; and those who
remained in the northern kingdom were given up to
idolatry or the degenerate and corrupt worship of the
high places. The chronicler then gives us some account
of Rehoboam's harem and children, and tells that he
dealt wisely, and dispersed his twenty-eight sons
<q>throughout all the lands of Judah and Benjamin, unto
every fenced city.</q> He gave them the means of maintaining
a luxurious table, and provided them with
numerous wives, and trusted that, being thus happily
circumstanced, they would lack leisure, energy, and
ambition to imitate Absalom and Adonijah.
</p>

<p>
Prosperity and security turned the head of Rehoboam
as they had done that of David: <q>He forsook the law of
Jehovah, and all Israel with him.</q> <q>All Israel</q> means
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
all the subjects of Rehoboam; the chronicler treats the
ten tribes as cut off from Israel. The faithful worshippers
of Jehovah in Judah had been reinforced by
the priests, Levites, and all other pious Israelites from
the northern kingdom; and yet in three years they
forsook the cause for which they had left their country
and their fathers house. Punishment was not long
delayed, for Shishak, king of Egypt, invaded Judah with
an immense host and took away the treasures of the
house of Jehovah and of the king's house.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler explains why Rehoboam was not
more severely punished.<note place='foot'>xii. 2-8, 12, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> Shishak appeared before
Jerusalem with his immense host: Ethiopians, Lubim
or Lybians, and Sukiim, a mysterious people only mentioned
here. The LXX. and Vulgate translate Sukiim
<q>Troglodytes,</q> apparently identifying them with the
cave-dwellers on the western or Ethiopian coast of the
Red Sea. In order to find safety from these strange
and barbarous enemies, Rehoboam and his princes were
gathered together in Jerusalem. Shemaiah the prophet
appeared before them, and declared that the invasion
was Jehovah's punishment for their sin, whereupon
they humbled themselves, and Jehovah accepted their
penitent submission. He would not destroy Jerusalem,
but the Jews should serve Shishak, <q>that they may
know My service and the service of the kingdoms of
the countries.</q> When they threw off the yoke of
Jehovah, they sold themselves into a worse bondage.
There is no freedom to be gained by repudiating the
restraints of morality and religion. If we do not choose
to be the servants of obedience unto righteousness,
our only alternative is to become the slaves <q>of sin
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
unto death.</q> The repentant sinner may return to his
true allegiance, and yet he may still be allowed to taste
something of the bitterness and humiliation of the
bondage of sin. His Shishak may be some evil habit
or propensity or special liability to temptation, that is
permitted to harass him without destroying his spiritual
life. In time the chastening of the Lord works out the
peaceable fruits of righteousness, and the Christian is
weaned for ever from the unprofitable service of sin.
</p>

<p>
Unhappily the repentance inspired by trouble and
distress is not always real and permanent. Many will
humble themselves before the Lord in order to avert
imminent ruin, and will forsake Him when the danger
has passed away. Apparently Rehoboam soon fell away
again into sin, for the final judgment upon him is, <q>He
did that which was evil, because he set not his heart to
seek Jehovah.</q><note place='foot'>xii. 14, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> David in his last prayer had asked
for a <q>perfect heart</q> for Solomon, but he had not
been able to secure this blessing for his grandson, and
Rehoboam was <q>the foolishness of the people, one that
had no understanding, who turned away the people
through his counsel.</q><note place='foot'>Ecclus. xlvii. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
Rehoboam was succeeded by his son Abijah, concerning
whom we are told in the book of Kings that <q>he
walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done
before him; and his heart was not perfect with Jehovah
his God, as the heart of David his father.</q> The
chronicler omits this unfavourable verdict; he does not
indeed classify Abijah among the good kings by the
usual formal statement that <q>he did that which was
good and right in the eyes of Jehovah,</q> but Abijah
delivers a hortatory speech and by Divine assistance
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
obtains a great victory over Jeroboam. There is not a
suggestion of any evil-doing on the part of Abijah; and
yet we gather from the history of Asa that in Abijah's
reign the cities of Judah were given up to idolatry, with
all its paraphernalia of <q>strange altars, high places,
Asherim, and sun-images.</q> As in the case of Solomon,
so here, the chronicler has sacrificed even the consistency
of his own narrative to his care for the reputation
of the house of David. How the verdict of ancient
history upon Abijah came to be set aside we do not
know. The charitable work of whitewashing the bad
characters of history has always had an attraction for
enterprising annalists; and Abijah was a more promising
subject than Nero, Tiberius, or Henry VIII. The
chronicler would rejoice to discover one more good
king of Judah; but yet why should the record of Abijah's
sins be expunged, while Ahaziah and Amon were still
held up to the execration of posterity? Probably the
chronicler was anxious that nothing should mar the
effect of his narrative of Abijah's victory. If his later
sources had recorded anything equally creditable of
Ahaziah and Amon, he might have ignored the judgment
of the book of Kings in their case also.
</p>

<p>
The section<note place='foot'>xiii. 3-22, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> to which the chronicler attaches so
much importance describes a striking episode in the
chronic warfare between Judah and Israel. Here
Israel is used, as in the older history, to mean the
northern kingdom, and does not denote the spiritual
Israel&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Judah&mdash;as in the previous chapter. This
perplexing variation in the use of the term <q>Israel</q>
shows how far Chronicles has departed from the religious
ideas of the book of Kings, and reminds us that the
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
chronicler has only partially and imperfectly assimilated
his older material.
</p>

<p>
Abijah and Jeroboam had each gathered an immense
army, but the army of Israel was twice as large as that
of Judah: Jeroboam had eight hundred thousand to
Abijah's four hundred thousand. Jeroboam advanced,
confident in his overwhelming superiority and happy
in the belief that Providence sides with the strongest
battalions. Abijah, however, was nothing dismayed
by the odds against him; his confidence was in Jehovah.
The two armies met in the neighbourhood of Mount
Zemaraim, upon which Abijah fixed his camp. Mount
Zemaraim was in the hill-country of Ephraim, but its
position cannot be determined with certainty; it was
probably near the border of the two kingdoms. Possibly
it was the site of the Benjamite city of the same name
mentioned in the book of Joshua in close connection
with Bethel.<note place='foot'>Josh. xviii. 22.</note> If so, we should look for it in the neighbourhood
of Bethel, a position which would suit the few
indications of place given by the narrative.
</p>

<p>
Before the battle, Abijah made an effort to induce
his enemies to depart in peace. From the vantage-ground
of his mountain camp he addressed Jeroboam
and his army as Jotham had addressed the men of
Shechem from Mount Gerizim.<note place='foot'>Judges ix. 8.</note> Abijah reminded the
rebels&mdash;for as such he regarded them&mdash;that Jehovah, the
God of Israel, had given the kingdom over Israel to
David for ever, even to him and to his sons, by a
covenant of salt, by a charter as solemn and unalterable
as that by which the heave-offerings had been
given to the sons of Aaron.<note place='foot'>Num. xviii. 19.</note> The obligation of an
Arab host to the guest who had sat at meat with him
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
and eaten of his salt was not more binding than the
Divine decree which had given the throne of Israel to
the house of David. And yet Jeroboam the son of
Nebat had dared to infringe the sacred rights of the
elect dynasty. He, the slave of Solomon, had risen
up and rebelled against his master.
</p>

<p>
The indignant prince of the house of David not
unnaturally forgets that the disruption was Jehovah's
own work, and that Jeroboam rose up against his
master, not at the instigation of Satan, but by the
command of the prophet Ahijah.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. x. 15.</note> The advocates of
sacred causes even in inspired moments are apt to be
one-sided in their statements of fact.
</p>

<p>
While Abijah is severe upon Jeroboam and his
accomplices and calls them <q>vain men, sons of Belial,</q>
he shows a filial tenderness for the memory of Rehoboam.
That unfortunate king had been taken at a
disadvantage, when he was young and tender-hearted
and unable to deal sternly with rebels. The tenderness
which could threaten to chastise his people with
scorpions must have been of the kind&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>That dared to look on torture and could not look on war</q>;
</quote>

<p>
it only appears in the history in Rehoboam's headlong
flight to Jerusalem. No one, however, will censure
Abijah for taking an unduly favourable view of his
father's character.
</p>

<p>
But whatever advantage Jeroboam may have found
in his first revolt, Abijah warns him that now he need
not think to withstand the kingdom of Jehovah in the
hands of the sons of David. He is no longer opposed
to an unseasoned youth, but to men who know their
overwhelming advantage. Jeroboam need not think to
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
supplement and complete his former achievements by
adding Judah and Benjamin to his kingdom. Against
his superiority of four hundred thousand soldiers Abijah
can set a Divine alliance, attested by the presence of
priests and Levites and the regular performance of
the pentateuchal ritual, whilst the alienation of Israel
from Jehovah is clearly shown by the irregular orders
of their priests. But let Abijah speak for himself:
<q>Ye be a great multitude, and there are with you
the golden calves which Jeroboam made you for gods.</q>
Possibly Abijah was able to point to Bethel, where the
royal sanctuary of the golden calf was visible to
both armies: <q>Have ye not driven out the priests of
Jehovah, the sons of Aaron and the Levites, and made
for yourselves priests in heathen fashion? When any
one comes to consecrate himself with a young bullock
and seven rams, ye make him a priest of them that are
no gods. But as for us, Jehovah is our God, and we
have not forsaken Him; and we have priests, the sons
of Aaron, ministering unto Jehovah, and the Levites,
doing their appointed work: and they burn unto
Jehovah morning and evening burnt offerings and
sweet incense: the shewbread also they set in order
upon the table that is kept free from all uncleanness;
and we have the candlestick of gold, with its lamps, to
burn every evening; for we observe the ordinances of
Jehovah our God; but ye have forsaken Him. And,
behold, God is with us at our head, and His priests,
with the trumpets of alarm, to sound an alarm against
you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against Jehovah,
the God of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper.</q>
</p>

<p>
This speech, we are told, <q>has been much admired.
It was well suited to its object, and exhibits correct
notions of the theocratical institutions.</q> But, like much
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
other admirable eloquence, in the House of Commons
and elsewhere, Abijah's speech had no effect upon
those to whom it was addressed. Jeroboam apparently
utilised the interval to plant an ambush in the rear of
the Jewish army.
</p>

<p>
Abijah's speech is unique. There have been other
instances in which commanders have tried to make
oratory take the place of arms, and, like Abijah, they
have mostly been unsuccessful; but they have usually
appealed to lower motives. Sennacherib's envoys tried
ineffectually to seduce the garrison of Jerusalem from
their allegiance to Hezekiah, but they relied on threats
of destruction and promises of <q>a land of corn and
wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive
and honey.</q> There is, however, a parallel instance
of more successful persuasion. When Octavian was
at war with his fellow-triumvir Lepidus, he made a
daring attempt to win over his enemy's army. He
did not address them from the safe elevation of a
neighbouring mountain, but rode openly into the
hostile camp. He appealed to the soldiers by motives
as lofty as those urged by Abijah, and called upon
them to save their country from civil war by deserting
Lepidus. At the moment his appeal failed, and
he only escaped with a wound in his breast; but
after a while his enemy's soldiers came over to him in
detachments, and eventually Lepidus was compelled to
surrender to his rival. But the deserters were not
altogether influenced by pure patriotism. Octavian
had carefully prepared the way for his dramatic appearance
in the camp of Lepidus, and had used grosser
means of persuasion than arguments addressed to
patriotic feeling.
</p>

<p>
Another instance of a successful appeal to a hostile
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
force is found in the history of the first Napoleon,
when he was marching on Paris after his return from
Elba. Near Grenoble he was met by a body of royal
troops. He at once advanced to the front, and exposing
his breast, exclaimed to the opposing ranks, <q>Here
is your emperor; if any one would kill me, let him
fire.</q> The detachment, which had been sent to arrest
his progress, at once deserted to their old commander.
Abijah's task was less hopeful: the soldiers whom
Octavian and Napoleon won over had known these
generals as lawful commanders of Roman and French
armies respectively, but Abijah could not appeal to
any old associations in the minds of Jeroboam's army;
the Israelites were animated by ancient tribal jealousies,
and Jeroboam was made of sterner stuff than Lepidus
or Louis XVIII. Abijah's appeal is a monument of
his humanity, faith, and devotion; and if it failed to
influence the enemy, doubtless served to inspirit his
own army.
</p>

<p>
At first, however, things went hardly with Judah.
They were outgeneralled as well as outnumbered;
Jeroboam's main body attacked them in front, and the
ambush assailed their rear. Like the men of Ai,
<q>when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was
before and behind them.</q> But Jehovah, who fought
against Ai, was fighting for Judah, and they cried unto
Jehovah; and then, as at Jericho, <q>the men of Judah
gave a shout, and when they shouted, God smote
Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.</q>
The rout was complete, and was accompanied by
terrible slaughter. No fewer than five hundred thousand
Israelites were slain by the men of Judah. The latter
pressed their advantage, and took the neighbouring city
of Bethel and other Israelite towns. For the time
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
Israel was <q>brought under,</q> and did not recover from
its tremendous losses during the three years of Abijah's
reign. As for Jeroboam, Jehovah smote him, and he
died; but <q>Abijah waxed mighty, and took unto himself
fourteen wives, and begat twenty-and-two sons and
sixteen daughters.</q><note place='foot'>This verse must of course be understood to give his whole family
history, and not merely that of his three years' reign.</note> His history closes with the
record of these proofs of Divine favour, and he <q>slept
with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of
David, and Asa his son reigned in his stead.</q>
</p>

<p>
The lesson which the chronicler intends to teach by
his narrative is obviously the importance of ritual, not
the importance of ritual apart from the worship of the
true God; he emphasises the presence of Jehovah with
Judah, in contrast to the Israelite worship of calves and
those that are no gods. The chronicler dwells upon
the maintenance of the legitimate priesthood and the
prescribed ritual as the natural expression and clear
proof of the devotion of the men of Judah to their God.
</p>

<p>
It may help us to realise the significance of Abijah's
speech, if we try to construct an appeal in the same
spirit for a Catholic general in the Thirty Years'
War addressing a hostile Protestant army. Imagine
Wallenstein or Tilly, moved by some unwonted spirit
of pious oratory, addressing the soldiers of Gustavus
Adolphus:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>We have a pope who sits in Peter's chair, bishops
and priests ministering unto the Lord, in the true
apostolical succession. The sacrifice of the Mass is
daily offered; matins, laud, vespers, and compline
are all duly celebrated; our churches are fragrant
with incense and glorious with stained glass and
images; we have crucifixes, and lamps, and candles; and
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
our priests are fitly clothed in ecclesiastical vestments;
for we observe the traditions of the Church, but ye
have forsaken the Divine order. Behold, God is with us
at our head; and we have banners blessed by the Pope.
O ye Swedes, ye fight against God; ye shall not
prosper.</q>
</p>

<p>
As Protestants we may find it difficult to sympathise
with the feelings of a devout Romanist or even with
those of a faithful observer of the complicated Mosaic
ritual. We could not construct so close a parallel to
Abijah's speech in terms of any Protestant order of
service, and yet the objections which any modern
denomination feels to departures from its own forms
of worship rest on the same principles as those of
Abijah. In the abstract the speech teaches two main
lessons: the importance of an official and duly
accredited ministry and of a suitable and authoritative
ritual. These principles are perfectly general, and
are not confined to what is usually known as sacerdotalism
and ritualism. Every Church has in practice
some official ministry, even those Churches that profess
to owe their separate existence to the necessity for protesting
against an official ministry. Men whose chief
occupation is to denounce priestcraft may themselves
be saturated with the sacerdotal spirit. Every Church,
too, has its ritual. The silence of a Friends' meeting is
as much a rite as the most elaborate genuflexion before
a highly ornamented altar. To regard either the
absence or presence of rites as essential is equally
ritualistic. The man who leaves his wonted place
of worship because <q>Amen</q> is sung at the end of a
hymn is as bigoted a ritualist as his brother who dare
not pass an altar without crossing himself. Let us
then consider the chronicler's two principles in this
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
broad sense. The official ministry of Israel consisted
of the priests and Levites, and the chronicler counted
it a proof of the piety of the Jews that they adhered
to this ministry and did not admit to the priesthood
any one who could bring a young bullock and seven
rams. The alternative was not between a hereditary
priesthood and one open to any aspirant with special
spiritual qualifications, but between a duly trained and
qualified ministry on the one hand and a motley crew
of the forerunners of Simon Magus on the other. It is
impossible not to sympathise with the chronicler. To
begin with, the property qualification was too low. If
livings are to be purchased at all, they should bear a
price commensurate with the dignity and responsibility
of the sacred office. A mere entrance fee, so to speak,
of a young bullock and seven rams must have flooded
Jeroboam's priesthood with a host of adventurers, to
whom the assumption of the office was a matter of
social or commercial speculation. The private adventure
system of providing for the ministry of the word
scarcely tends to either the dignity or the efficiency of
the Church. But, in any case, it is not desirable that
mere worldly gifts, money, social position, or even
intellect should be made the sole passports to Christian
service; even the traditions and education of a hereditary
priesthood would be more probable channels of
spiritual qualifications.
</p>

<p>
Another point that the chronicler objects to in
Jeroboam's priests is the want of any other than a
property qualification. Any one who chose could be a
priest. Such a system combined what might seem
opposite vices. It preserved an official ministry; these
self-appointed priests formed a clerical order; and yet
it gave no guarantee whatever of either fitness or
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
devotion. The chronicler, on the other hand, by the
importance he attaches to the Levitical priesthood,
recognises the necessity of an official ministry, but is
anxious that it should be guarded with jealous care
against the intrusion of unsuitable persons. A conclusive
argument for an official ministry is to be found
in its formal adoption by most Churches and its
uninvited appearance in the rest. We should not now
be contented with the safeguards against unsuitable
ministers to be found in hereditary succession; the
system of the Pentateuch would be neither acceptable
nor possible in the nineteenth century: and yet, if it
had been perfectly administered, the Jewish priesthood
would have been worthy of its high office, nor were
the times ripe for the substitution of any better
system. Many of the considerations which justify
hereditary succession in a constitutional monarchy
might be adduced in defence of a hereditary priesthood.
Even now, without any pressure of law or custom, there
is a certain tendency towards hereditary succession in
the ministerial office. It would be easy to name distinguished
ministers who were inspired for the high calling
by their fathers' devoted service, and who received
an invaluable preparation for their life-work from the
Christian enthusiasm of a clerical household. The
clerical ancestry of the Wesleys is only one among many
illustrations of an inherited genius for the ministry.
</p>

<p>
But though the best method of obtaining a suitable
ministry varies with changing circumstances, the chronicler's
main principle is of permanent and universal
application. The Church has always felt a just concern
that the official representatives of its faith and order
should commend themselves to every man's conscience
in the sight of God. The prophet needs neither testimonials
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
nor official status: the word of the Lord can
have free course without either; but the appointment
or election to ecclesiastical office entrusts the official
with the honour of the Church and in a measure of its
Master.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's other principle is the importance of
a suitable and authoritative ritual. We have already
noticed that any order of service that is fixed by the
constitution or custom of a Church involves the principle
of ritual. Abijah's speech does not insist that only the
established ritual should be tolerated; such questions
had not come within the chronicler's horizon. The
merit of Judah lay in possessing and practising a
legitimate ritual, that is to say in observing the Pauline
injunction to do all things decently and in order. The
present generation is not inclined to enforce any very
stringent obedience to Paul's teaching, and finds it
difficult to sympathise with Abijah's enthusiasm for the
symbolism of worship. But men to-day are not radically
different from the chronicler's contemporaries, and it is
as legitimate to appeal to spiritual sensibility through
the eye as through the ear; architecture and decoration
are neither more nor less spiritual than an attractive
voice and impressive elocution. Novelty and variety
have, or should have, their legitimate place in public
worship; but the Church has its obligations to those
who have more regular spiritual wants. Most of us
find much of the helpfulness of public worship in the
influence of old and familiar spiritual associations,
which can only be maintained by a measure of permanence
and fixity in Divine service. The symbolism
of the Lord's Supper never loses its freshness, and yet
it is restful because familiar and impressive because
ancient. On the other hand, the maintenance of this
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
ritual is a constant testimony to the continuity of
Christian life and faith. Moreover, in this rite the great
bulk of Christendom finds the outward and visible sign
of its unity.
</p>

<p>
Ritual, too, has its negative value. By observing the
Levitical ordinances the Jews were protected from the
vagaries of any ambitious owner of a young bullock and
seven rams. While we grant liberty to all to use the
form of worship in which they find most spiritual
profit, we need to have Churches whose ritual will be
comparatively fixed. Christians who find themselves
most helped by the more quiet and regular methods
of devotion naturally look to a settled order of service
to protect them from undue and distracting excitement.
</p>

<p>
In spite of the wide interval that separates the
modern Church from Judaism, we can still discern a
unity of principle, and are glad to confirm the judgment
of Christian experience from the lessons of an older
and different dispensation. But we should do injustice
to the chronicler's teaching if we forgot that for his
own times his teaching was capable of much more
definite and forcible application. Christianity and Islam
have purified religious worship throughout Europe,
America, and a large portion of Asia. We are no
longer tempted by the cruel and loathsome rites of
heathenism. The Jews knew the wild extravagance,
gross immorality, and ruthless cruelty of Phœnician
and Syrian worship. If we had lived in the chronicler's
age and had shared his experience of idolatrous
rites, we should have also shared his enthusiasm for
the pure and lofty ritual of the Pentateuch. We should
have regarded it as a Divine barrier between Israel and
the abominations of heathenism, and should have been
jealous for its strict observance.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Asa: Divine Retribution. 2 Chron. xiv.-xvi.</head>

<p>
Abijah, dying, as far as we can gather from
Chronicles, in the odour of sanctity, was succeeded
by his son Asa. The chronicler's history of Asa is
much fuller than that which is given in the book of
Kings. The older narrative is used as a framework
into which material from later sources is freely inserted.
The beginning of the new reign was singularly
promising. Abijah had been a very David, he had
fought the battles of Jehovah, and had assured the
security and independence of Judah. Asa, like Solomon,
entered into the peaceful enjoyment of his predecessor's
exertions in the field. <q>In his days the land was quiet
ten years,</q> as in the days when the judges had delivered
Israel, and he was able to exhort his people to prudent
effort by reminding them that Jehovah had given them
rest on every side.<note place='foot'>xiv. 1, 7, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> This interval of quiet was used
for both religious reform and military precautions.<note place='foot'>xiv. 3-9, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>
The high places and heathen idols and symbols which
had somehow survived Abijah's zeal for the Mosaic
ritual were swept away, and Judah was commanded to
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
seek Jehovah and observe the Law; and he built
fortresses with towers, and gates, and bars, and
raised a great army <q>that bare bucklers and spears,</q>&mdash;no
mere hasty levy of half-armed peasants with
scythes and axes. The mighty array surpassed even
Abijah's great muster of four hundred thousand from
Judah and Benjamin: there were five hundred and
eighty thousand men, three hundred thousand out of
Judah that bare bucklers and spears and two hundred
and eighty thousand out of Benjamin that bare shields
and drew bows. The great muster of Benjamites under
Asa is in striking contrast to the meagre tale of six
hundred warriors that formed the whole strength of
Benjamin after its disastrous defeat in the days of the
judges; and the splendid equipment of this mighty host
shows the rapid progress of the nation from the
desperate days of Shamgar and Jael or even of Saul's
early reign, when <q>there was neither shield nor spear
seen among forty thousand in Israel.</q>
</p>

<p>
These references to buildings, especially fortresses,
to military stores and the vast numbers of Jewish and
Israelite armies, form a distinct class amongst the
additions made by the chronicler to the material
taken from the book of Kings. They are found in
the narratives of the reigns of David, Rehoboam,
Jehoshaphat, Uzziah, Jotham, Manasseh, in fact in
the reigns of nearly all the good kings; Manasseh's
building was done after he had turned from his evil
ways.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xii., etc.; 2 Chron. xi. 5 ff., xvii. 12 ff., xxvi. 9 ff. xxvii.
4 ff., xxxiii. 14.</note> Hezekiah and Josiah were too much occupied
with sacred festivals on the one hand and hostile
invaders on the other to have much leisure for building,
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
and it would not have been in keeping with Solomon's
character as the prince of peace to have laid stress on
his arsenals and armies. Otherwise the chronicler,
living at a time when the warlike resources of Judah
were of the slightest, was naturally interested in these
reminiscences of departed glory; and the Jewish
provincials would take a pride in relating these pieces
of antiquarian information about their native towns,
much as the servants of old manor-houses delight to
point out the wing which was added by some famous
Cavalier or by some Jacobite squire.
</p>

<p>
Asa's warlike preparations were possibly intended, like
those of the Triple Alliance, to enable him to maintain
peace; but if so, their sequel did not illustrate the
maxim, <q>Si vis pacem, para bellum.</q> The rumour of his
vast armaments reached a powerful monarch: <q>Zerah
the Ethiopian.</q><note place='foot'>xiv. 9-15.</note> The vagueness of this description is
doubtless due to the remoteness of the chronicler from
the times he is describing. Zerah has sometimes been
identified with Shishak's successor, Osorkon I., the
second king of the twenty-second Egyptian dynasty.
Zerah felt that Asa's great army was a standing
menace to the surrounding princes, and undertook the
task of destroying this new military power: <q>He came
out against them.</q> Numerous as Asa's forces were, they
still left him dependent upon Jehovah, for the enemy
were even more numerous and better equipped. Zerah
led to a battle an army of a million men, supported by
three hundred war chariots. With this enormous
host he came to Mareshah, at the foot of the Judæan
highlands, in a direction south-west of Jerusalem. In
spite of the inferiority of his army, Asa came out to
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
meet him; <q>and they set the battle in array in the
valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.</q> Like Abijah, Asa
felt that, with his Divine Ally, he need not be afraid
of the odds against him even when they could be
counted by hundreds of thousands. Trusting in
Jehovah, he had taken the field against the enemy;
and now at the decisive moment he made a confident
appeal for help: <q>Jehovah, there is none beside Thee
to help between the mighty and him that hath no
strength.</q> Five hundred and eighty thousand men
seemed nothing compared to the host arrayed against
them, and outnumbering them in the proportion of
nearly two to one. <q>Help us, Jehovah our God; for
we rely on Thee, and in Thy name are we come against
this multitude. Jehovah, Thou art our God; let not
man prevail against Thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jehovah justified the trust reposed in Him. He smote
the Ethiopians, and they fled towards the south-west
in the direction of Egypt; and Asa and his army
pursued them as far as Gerar, with fearful slaughter,
so that of Zerah's million followers not one remained
alive.<note place='foot'>So R.V. marg.; R.V. text (with which A.V. is in substantial agreement):
<q>There fell of the Ethiopians so many that they could not
recover themselves</q>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the routed army were never able to rally.</note> Of course this statement is hyperbolical. The
carnage was enormous, and no living enemies remained
in sight. Apparently Gerar and the neighbouring
cities had aided Zerah in his advance and attempted
to shelter the fugitives from Mareshah. Paralysed
with fear of Jehovah, whose avenging wrath had
been so terribly manifested, these cities fell an easy
prey to the victorious Jews. They smote and spoiled
all the cities about Gerar, and reaped a rich harvest,
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
<q>for there was much spoil in them.</q> It seems that
the nomad tribes of the southern wilderness had
also in some way identified themselves with the
invaders; Asa attacked them in their turn. <q>They
smote also the tents of cattle</q>; and as the wealth of
these tribes lay in their flocks and herds; <q>they carried
away sheep in abundance and camels, and returned to
Jerusalem.</q>
</p>

<p>
This victory is closely parallel to that of Abijah over
Jeroboam. In both the numbers of the armies are
reckoned by hundreds of thousands; and the hostile
host outnumbers the army of Judah in the one case
by exactly two to one, in the other by nearly that
proportion: in both the king of Judah trusts with calm
assurance to the assistance of Jehovah, and Jehovah
smites the enemy; the Jews then massacre the
defeated army and spoil or capture the neighbouring
cities.
</p>

<p>
These victories over superior numbers may easily be
paralleled or surpassed by numerous striking examples
from secular history. The odds were greater at
Agincourt, where at least sixty thousand French were
defeated by not more than twenty thousand Englishmen;
at Marathon the Greeks routed a Persian army ten
times as numerous as their own; in India English
generals have defeated innumerable hordes of native
warriors, as when Wellesley&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Against the myriads of Assaye</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Clashed with his fiery few and won.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
For the most part victorious generals have been ready
to acknowledge the succouring arm of the God of battles.
Shakespeare's Henry V. after Agincourt speaks altogether
in the spirit of Asa's prayer:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><q rend='pre'>... O God, Thy arm was here;</q></l>
<l>And not to us, but to Thy arm alone,</l>
<l>Ascribe we all....</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>... Take it, God,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>For it is only Thine.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
When the small craft that made up Elizabeth's fleet
defeated the huge Spanish galleons and galleasses, and
the storms of the northern seas finished the work of
destruction, the grateful piety of Protestant England
felt that its foes had been destroyed by the breath of
the Lord; <q>Afflavit Deus et dissipantur.</q>
</p>

<p>
The principle that underlies such feelings is quite
independent of the exact proportions of opposing armies.
The victories of inferior numbers in a righteous cause
are the most striking, but not the most significant,
illustrations of the superiority of moral to material
force. In the wider movements of international politics
we may find even more characteristic instances. It is
true of nations as well as of individuals that&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The Lord killeth and maketh alive;</q></l>
<l>He bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up:</l>
<l>The Lord maketh poor and maketh rich;</l>
<l>He bringeth low, He also lifteth up:</l>
<l>He raiseth up the poor out of the dust,</l>
<l>He lifteth up the needy from the dunghill,</l>
<l>To make them sit with princes</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And inherit the throne of glory.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Italy in the eighteenth century seemed as hopelessly
divided as Israel under the judges, and Greece as
completely enslaved to the <q>unspeakable Turk</q> as the
Jews to Nebuchadnezzar; and yet, destitute as they
were of any material resources, these nations had at
their disposal great moral forces: the memory of ancient
greatness and the sentiment of nationality; and to-day
Italy can count hundreds of thousands like the
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
chronicler's Jewish kings, and Greece builds her fortresses
by land and her ironclads to command the sea.
The Lord has fought for Israel.
</p>

<p>
But the principle has a wider application. A little
examination of the more obscure and complicated movements
of social life will show moral forces everywhere
overcoming and controlling the apparently irresistible
material forces opposed to them. The English and
American pioneers of the movements for the abolition
of slavery had to face what seemed an impenetrable
phalanx of powerful interests and influences; but probably
any impartial student of history would have
foreseen the ultimate triumph of a handful of earnest
men over all the wealth and political power of the
slave-owners. The moral forces at the disposal of
the abolitionists were obviously irresistible. But the
soldier in the midst of smoke and tumult may still
be anxious and despondent at the very moment when
the spectator sees clearly that the battle is won; and
the most earnest Christian workers sometimes falter
when they realise the vast and terrible forces that fight
against them. At such times we are both rebuked
and encouraged by the simple faith of the chronicler
in the overruling power of God.
</p>

<p>
It may be objected that if victory were to be secured
by Divine intervention, there was no need to muster five
hundred and eighty thousand men or indeed any army
at all. If in any and every case God disposes, what
need is there for the devotion to His service of our
best strength, and energy, and culture, or of any human
effort at all? A wholesome spiritual instinct leads the
chronicler to emphasise the great preparations of Abijah
and Asa. We have no right to look for Divine co-operation
till we have done our best; we are not to
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
sit with folded hands and expect a complete salvation
to be wrought for us, and then to continue as idle
spectators of God's redemption of mankind: we are
to tax our resources to the utmost to gather our
hundreds of thousands of soldiers; we are to work out
our own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God
that worketh in us both to will and to do of His good
pleasure.
</p>

<p>
This principle may be put in another way. Even
to the hundreds of thousands the Divine help is still
necessary. The leaders of great hosts are as dependent
upon Divine help as Jonathan and his armour-bearer
fighting single-handed against a Philistine garrison, or
David arming himself with a sling and stone against
Goliath of Gath. The most competent Christian
worker in the prime of his spiritual strength needs
grace as much as the untried youth making his first
venture in the Lord's service.
</p>

<p>
At this point we meet with another of the chronicler's
obvious self-contradictions. At the beginning of the
narrative of Asa's reign we are told that the king did
away with the high places and the symbols of idolatrous
worship, and that, because Judah had thus sought
Jehovah, He gave them rest. The deliverance from
Zerah is another mark of Divine favour. And yet in
the fifteenth chapter Asa, in obedience to prophetic
admonition, takes away the abominations from his
dominions, as if there had been no previous reformation,
but we are told that the high places were not taken out
of Israel. The context would naturally suggest that
Israel here means Asa's kingdom, as the true Israel of
God; but as the verse is borrowed from the book of
Kings, and <q>out of Israel</q> is an editorial addition
made by the chronicler, it is probably intended to
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
harmonise the borrowed verse with the chronicler's
previous statement that Asa did away with the high
places. If so, we must understand that Israel means
the northern kingdom, from which the high places
had not been removed, though Judah had been purged
from these abominations. But here, as often elsewhere,
Chronicles taken alone affords no explanation of its
inconsistencies.
</p>

<p>
Again, in Asa's first reformation he commanded Judah
to seek Jehovah and to do the Law and the commandments;
and accordingly Judah sought the Lord.
Moreover, Abijah, about seventeen years<note place='foot'>The second reformation is dated early in Asa's fifteenth year, and
Abijah only reigned three years.</note> before Asa's
second reformation, made it his special boast that Judah
had not forsaken Jehovah, but had priests ministering
unto Jehovah, <q>the sons of Aaron and the Levites in
their work.</q> During Rehoboam's reign of seventeen
years Jehovah was duly honoured for the first three
years, and again after Shishak's invasion in the fifth
year of Rehoboam. So that for the previous thirty or
forty years the due worship of Jehovah had only been
interrupted by occasional lapses into disobedience.
But now the prophet Oded holds before this faithful
people the warning example of the <q>long seasons</q> when
Israel was without the true God, and without a teaching
priest, and without law. And yet previously Chronicles
supplies an unbroken list of high-priests from Aaron
downwards. In response to Oded's appeal, the king
and people set about the work of reformation as if they
had tolerated some such neglect of God, the priests,
and the Law as the prophet had described.
</p>

<p>
Another minor discrepancy is found in the statement
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
that <q>the heart of Asa was perfect all his days</q>; this
is reproduced verbatim from the book of Kings.
Immediately afterwards the chronicler relates the evil
doings of Asa in the closing years of his reign.
</p>

<p>
Such contradictions render it impossible to give a
complete and continuous exposition of Chronicles that
shall be at the same time consistent. Nevertheless
they are not without their value for the Christian
student. They afford evidence of the good faith of the
chronicler. His contradictions are clearly due to his
use of independent and discrepant sources, and not to
any tampering with the statements of his authorities.
They are also an indication that the chronicler attaches
much more importance to spiritual edification than to
historical accuracy. When he seeks to set before his
contemporaries the higher nature and better life of the
great national heroes, and thus to provide them with an
ideal of kingship, he is scrupulously and painfully
careful to remove everything that would weaken the
force of the lesson which he is trying to teach; but he is
comparatively indifferent to accuracy of historical detail.
When his authorities contradict each other as to the
number or the date of Asa's reformations, or even the
character of his later years, he does not hesitate to
place the two narratives side by side and practically to
draw lessons from both. The work of the chronicler
and its presence with the Pentateuch and the Synoptic
Gospels in the sacred canon imply an emphatic declaration
of the judgment of the Spirit and the Church
that detailed historical accuracy is not a necessary
consequence of inspiration. In expounding this second
narrative of a reformation by Asa, we shall make no
attempt at complete harmony with the rest of Chronicles;
any inconsistency between the exposition here and
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
elsewhere will simply arise from a faithful adherence to
our text.
</p>

<p>
The occasion then of Asa's second reformation<note place='foot'>xv., based upon 1 Kings xv. 13-15, but the great bulk of the
chapter is peculiar to Chronicles; the original passage from Kings is
reproduced, with slight changes in vv. 16-18.</note> was
as follows: Asa was returning in triumph from his
great defeat of Zerah, bringing with him substantial
fruits of victory in the shape of abundant spoil.
Wealth and power had proved a snare to David and
Rehoboam, and had involved them in grievous sin. Asa
might also have succumbed to the temptations of
prosperity; but, by a special Divine grace not vouchsafed
to his predecessors, he was guarded against
danger by a prophetic warning. At the very moment
when Asa might have expected to be greeted by
the acclamations of the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
when the king would be elate with the sense of Divine
favour, military success, and popular applause, the
prophet's admonition checked the undue exaltation
which might have hurried Asa into presumptuous sin.
Asa and his people were not to presume upon their
privilege; its continuance was altogether dependent
upon their continued obedience: if they fell into sin,
the rewards of their former loyalty would vanish like
fairy gold. <q>Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and
Benjamin: Jehovah is with you while ye be with Him;
and if ye seek Him, He will be found of you; but if
ye forsake Him, He will forsake you.</q> This lesson
was enforced from the earlier history of Israel. The
following verses are virtually a summary of the history
of the judges:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Now for long seasons Israel was without the true
God, and without teaching priest, and without law.</q>
</p>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<p>
Judges tells how again and again Israel fell away
from Jehovah. <q>But when in their distress they turned
unto Jehovah, the God of Israel, and sought Him, He
was found of them.</q>
</p>

<p>
Oded's address is very similar to another and
somewhat fuller summary of the history of the judges,
contained in Samuel's farewell to the people, in which he
reminded them how when they forgot Jehovah, their
God, He sold them into the hand of their enemies, and
when they cried unto Jehovah, He sent Zerubbabel,
and Barak, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered
them out of the hand of their enemies on every side,
and they dwelt in safety.<note place='foot'>2 Sam. xii. 9-11. <q>Barak</q> with LXX. and Peshite; Masoretic
text has <q>Bedan.</q></note> Oded proceeds to other
characteristics of the period of the judges: <q>There
was no peace to him that went out, nor to him
that came in; but great vexations were upon all the
inhabitants of the lands. And they were broken in
pieces, nation against nation and city against city, for
God did vex them with all adversity.</q>
</p>

<p>
Deborah's song records great vexations: the highways
were unoccupied, and the travellers walked
through by-ways; the rulers ceased in Israel; Gideon
<q>threshed wheat by the winepress to hide it from the
Midianites.</q> The breaking of nation against nation
and city against city will refer to the destruction of
Succoth and Penuel by Gideon, the sieges of Shechem
and Thebez by Abimelech, the massacre of the
Ephraimites by Jephthah, and the civil war between
Benjamin and the rest of Israel and the consequent
destruction of Jabesh-gilead.<note place='foot'>Judges v. 6, 7; vi. 11; viii. 15-17; ix.; xii. 1-7; xx.; xxi.</note>
</p>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<p>
<q>But,</q> said Oded, <q>be ye strong, and let not your
hands be slack, for your work shall be rewarded.</q>
Oded implies that abuses were prevalent in Judah
which might spread and corrupt the whole people, so
as to draw down upon them the wrath of God and
plunge them into all the miseries of the times of the
judges. These abuses were wide-spread, supported by
powerful interests and numerous adherents. The queen-mother,
one of the most important personages in an
Eastern state, was herself devoted to heathen observances.
Their suppression needed courage, energy, and
pertinacity; but if they were resolutely grappled with,
Jehovah would reward the efforts of His servants with
success, and Judah would enjoy prosperity. Accordingly
Asa took courage and put away the abominations out
of Judah and Benjamin and the cities he held in
Ephraim. The abominations were the idols and all
the cruel and obscene accompaniments of heathen
worship.<note place='foot'>Cf. 1 Kings xv. 12.</note> In the prophet's exhortation to be strong,
and not be slack, and in the corresponding statement
that Asa took courage, we have a hint for all
reformers. Neither Oded nor Asa underrated the
serious nature of the task before them. They counted
the cost, and with open eyes and full knowledge confronted
the evil they meant to eradicate. The full
significance of the chronicler's language is only seen
when we remember what preceded the prophet's appeal
to Asa. The captain of half a million soldiers, the
conqueror of a million Ethiopians with three hundred
chariots, has to take courage before he can bring
himself to put away the abominations out of his own
dominions. Military machinery is more readily created
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
than national righteousness; it is easier to slaughter
one's neighbours than to let light into the dark places
that are full of the habitations of cruelty; and vigorous
foreign policy is a poor substitute for good administration.
The principle has its application to the individual.
The beam in our own eye seems more difficult to extract
than the mote in our brother's, and a man often needs
more moral courage to reform himself than to denounce
other people's sins or urge them to accept salvation.
Most ministers could confirm from their own experience
Portia's saying, <q>I can easier teach twenty what were
good to be done than be one of the twenty to follow
mine own teaching.</q>
</p>

<p>
Asa's reformation was constructive as well as
destructive; the toleration of <q>abominations</q> had
diminished the zeal of the people for Jehovah, and
even the altar of Jehovah before the porch of the Temple
had suffered from neglect: it was now renewed, and
Asa assembled the people for a great festival. Under
Rehoboam many pious Israelites had left the northern
kingdom to dwell where they could freely worship at
the Temple; under Asa there was a new migration,
<q>for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance when
they saw that Jehovah his God was with him.</q> And
so it came about that in the great assembly which Asa
gathered together at Jerusalem not only Judah and
Benjamin, but also Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon,
were represented. The chronicler has already told us
that after the return from the Captivity some of the
children of Ephraim and Manasseh dwelt at Jerusalem
with the children of Judah and Benjamin,<note place='foot'>1 Chron. ix. 3.</note> and he is
always careful to note any settlement of members of
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
the ten tribes in Judah or any acquisition of northern
territory by the kings of Judah. Such facts illustrated
his doctrine that Judah was the true spiritual Israel,
the real δωδεκάφυλον, or twelve-tribed whole, of the
chosen people.
</p>

<p>
Asa's festival was held in the third month of his
fifteenth year, the month Sivan, corresponding roughly
to our June. The Feast of Weeks, at which first-fruits
were offered, fell in this month; and his festival was
probably a special celebration of this feast. The
sacrifice of seven hundred oxen and seven thousand
sheep out of the spoil taken from the Ethiopians and
their allies might be considered a kind of first-fruits.
The people pledged themselves most solemnly to permanent
obedience to Jehovah; this festival and its
offerings were to be first-fruits or earnest of future
loyalty. <q>They entered into a covenant to seek
Jehovah, the God of their fathers, with all their heart
and with all their soul; ... they sware unto Jehovah
with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets,
and with cornets.</q> The observance of this covenant
was not to be left to the uncertainties of individual
loyalty; the community were to be on their guard
against offenders, Achans who might trouble Israel.
According to the stern law of the Pentateuch,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxii. 20; Deut. xiii. 5, 9, 15.</note> <q>whosoever
would not seek Jehovah, the God of Israel,
should be put to death, whether small or great, whether
man or woman.</q> The seeking of Jehovah, so far as
it could be enforced by penalties, must have consisted
in external observances; and the usual proof that a
man did not seek Jehovah would be found in his seeking
other gods and taking part in heathen rites. Such
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
apostacy was not merely an ecclesiastical offence: it
involved immorality and a falling away from patriotism.
The pious Jew could no more tolerate heathenism than
we could tolerate in England religions that sanctioned
polygamy or suttee.
</p>

<p>
Having thus entered into covenant with Jehovah,
<q>all Judah rejoiced at their oath because they had
sworn with all their heart, and sought Him with their
whole desire.</q> At the beginning, no doubt, they, like
their king, <q>took courage</q>; they addressed themselves
with reluctance and apprehension to an unwelcome and
hazardous enterprise. They now rejoiced over the
Divine grace that had inspired their efforts and been
manifested in their courage and devotion, over the
happy issue of their enterprise, and over the universal
enthusiasm for Jehovah; and He set the seal of His
approval upon their gladness, He was found of them,
and Jehovah gave them rest round about, so that there
was no more war for twenty years: unto the thirty-fifth
year of Asa's reign. It is an unsavoury task to put
away abominations: many foul nests of unclean birds
are disturbed in the process; men would not choose
to have this particular cross laid upon them, but only
those who take up their cross and follow Christ can
hope to enter into the joy of the Lord.
</p>

<p>
The narrative of this second reformation is completed
by the addition of details borrowed from the book of
Kings. The chronicler next recounts how in the thirty-sixth
year of Asa's reign Baasha began to fortify
Ramah as an outpost against Judah, but was forced to
abandon his undertaking by the intervention of the
Syrian king, Benhadad, whom Asa hired with his own
treasures and those of the Temple; whereupon Asa
carried off Baasha's stones and timber and built Geba
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
and Mizpah as Jewish outposts against Israel. With
the exception of the date and a few minor changes, the
narrative so far is taken verbatim from the book of
Kings. The chronicler, like the author of the priestly
document of the Pentateuch, was anxious to provide
his readers with an exact and complete system of
chronology; he was the Ussher or Clinton of his
generation. His date of the war against Baasha is
probably based upon an interpretation of the source
used for chap. xv.; the first reformation secured a
rest of ten years, the second and more thorough
reformation a rest exactly twice as long as the first.
In the interest of these chronological references, the
chronicler has sacrificed a statement twice repeated in
the book of Kings: that there was war between Asa
and Baasha all their days. As Baasha came to the
throne in Asa's third year, the statement of the book of
Kings would have seemed to contradict the chronicler's
assertion that there was no war from the fifteenth to
the thirty-fifth year of Asa's reign.<note place='foot'>1 Kings xv. 16, 32, 33.</note>
</p>

<p>
After his victory over Zerah, Asa received a Divine
message<note place='foot'>xvi. 7-10, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> which somewhat checked the exuberance of
his triumph; a similar message awaited him after his
successful expedition to Ramah. By Oded Jehovah
had warned Asa, but now He commissioned Hanani
the seer to pronounce a sentence of condemnation.
The ground of the sentence was that Asa had not
relied on Jehovah, but on the king of Syria.
</p>

<p>
Here the chronicler echoes one of the key-notes of
the great prophets. Isaiah had protested against the
alliance which Ahaz concluded with Assyria in order to
obtain assistance against the united onset of Rezin,
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
king of Syria, and Pekah, king of Israel, and had
predicted that Jehovah would bring upon Ahaz, his
people, and his dynasty days that had not come since
the disruption, even the king of Assyria.<note place='foot'>Isa. vii. 17.</note> When this
prediction was fulfilled, and the thundercloud of Assyrian
invasion darkened all the land of Judah, the Jews, in
their lack of faith, looked to Egypt for deliverance;
and again Isaiah denounced the foreign alliance:
<q>Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, ...
but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither
seek Jehovah; ... the strength of Pharaoh shall
be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt
your confusion.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xxxi. 1; xxx. 3.</note> So Jeremiah in his turn protested
against a revival of the Egyptian alliance: <q>Thou shall
be ashamed of Egypt also, as thou wast ashamed of
Assyria.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. ii. 36.</note>
</p>

<p>
In their successive calamities the Jews could derive no
comfort from a study of previous history; the pretext
upon which each of their oppressors had intervened in
the affairs of Palestine had been an invitation from
Judah. In their trouble they had sought a remedy
worse than the disease; the consequences of this
political quackery had always demanded still more
desperate and fatal medicines. Freedom from the
border raids of the Ephraimites was secured at the
price of the ruthless devastations of Hazael; deliverance
from Rezin only led to the wholesale massacres and
spoliation of Sennacherib. Foreign alliance was an
opiate that had to be taken in continually increasing
doses, till at last it caused the death of the patient.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless these are not the lessons which the
seer seeks to impress upon Asa. Hanani takes a
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
loftier tone. He does not tell him that his unholy
alliance with Benhadad was the first of a chain of
circumstances that would end in the ruin of Judah.
Few generations are greatly disturbed by the prospect
of the ruin of their country in the distant future: <q>After
us the Deluge.</q> Even the pious king Hezekiah, when
told of the coming captivity of Judah, found much
comfort in the thought that there should be peace and
truth in his days. After the manner of the prophets,
Hanani's message is concerned with his own times.
To his large faith the alliance with Syria presented
itself chiefly as the loss of a great opportunity. Asa
had deprived himself of the privilege of fighting with
Syria, whereby Jehovah would have found fresh occasion
to manifest His infinite power and His gracious
favour towards Judah. Had there been no alliance
with Judah, the restless and warlike king of Syria
might have joined Baasha to attack Asa; another
million of the heathen and other hundreds of their
chariots would have been destroyed by the resistless
might of the Lord of Hosts. And yet, in spite of the
great object-lesson he had received in the defeat of
Zerah, Asa had not thought of Jehovah as his Ally.
He had forgotten the all-observing, all-controlling
providence of Jehovah, and had thought it necessary
to supplement the Divine protection by hiring a
heathen king with the treasures of the Temple; and yet
<q>the eyes of Jehovah run to and fro throughout the
whole earth, to show Himself strong in behalf of them
whose heart is perfect toward Him.</q> With this thought,
that the eyes of Jehovah run to and fro throughout the
earth, Zechariah<note place='foot'>Zech. iv. 10.</note> comforted the Jews in the dark days
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
between the Return and the rebuilding of the Temple.
Possibly during Asa's twenty years of tranquillity his
faith had become enfeebled for want of any severe
discipline. It is only with a certain reserve that we can
venture to pray that the Lord will <q>take from our lives
the strain and stress.</q> The discipline of helplessness
and dependence preserves the consciousness of God's
loving providence. The resources of Divine grace are
not altogether intended for our personal comfort; we
are to tax them to the utmost, in the assurance that
God will honour all our drafts upon His treasury.
The great opportunities of twenty years of peace and
prosperity were not given to Asa to lay up funds with
which to bribe a heathen king, and then, with this
reinforcement of his accumulated resources to accomplish
the mighty enterprise of stealing Baasha's stones
and timber and building the walls of a couple of
frontier fortresses. With such a history and such
opportunities behind him, Asa should have felt himself
competent, with Jehovah's help, to deal with both
Baasha and Benhadad, and should have had courage
to confront them both.
</p>

<p>
Sin like Asa's has been the supreme apostacy of
the Church in all her branches and through all her
generations: Christ has been denied, not by lack of
devotion, but by want of faith. Champions of the
truth, reformers and guardians of the Temple, like Asa,
have been eager to attach to their holy cause the cruel
prejudices of ignorance and folly, the greed and
vindictiveness of selfish men. They have feared lest
these potent forces should be arrayed amongst the
enemies of the Church and her Master. Sects and
parties have eagerly contested the privilege of counselling
a profligate prince how he should satisfy his
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
thirst for blood and exercise his wanton and brutal
insolence; the Church has countenanced almost every
iniquity and striven to quench by persecution every
new revelation of the Spirit, in order to conciliate
vested interests and established authorities. It has
even been suggested that national Churches and
great national vices were so intimately allied that
their supporters were content that they should stand or
fall together. On the other hand, the advocates of
reform have not been slow to appeal to popular jealousy
and to aggravate the bitterness of social feuds. To
Hanani the seer had come the vision of a larger and
purer faith, that would rejoice to see the cause of Satan
supported by all the evil passions and selfish interests
that are his natural allies. He was assured that the
greater the host of Satan, the more signal and
complete would be Jehovah's triumph. If we had his
faith, we should not be anxious to bribe Satan to cast
out Satan, but should come to understand that the full
muster of hell assailing us in front is less dangerous
than a few companies of diabolic mercenaries in our
own array. In the former case the overthrow of the
powers of darkness is more certain and more complete.
</p>

<p>
The evil consequences of Asa's policy were not
confined to the loss of a great opportunity, nor were
his treasures the only price he was to pay for fortifying
Geba and Mizpah with Baasha's building materials.
Hanani declared to him that from henceforth he should
have wars. This purchased alliance was only the
beginning, and not the end, of troubles. Instead of the
complete and decisive victory which had disposed of
the Ethiopians once for all, Asa and his people were
harassed and exhausted by continual warfare. The
Christian life would have more decisive victories, and
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
would be less of a perpetual and wearing struggle, if
we had faith to refrain from the use of doubtful means
for high ends.
</p>

<p>
Oded's message of warning had been accepted and
obeyed, but Asa was now no longer docile to Divine
discipline. David and Hezekiah submitted themselves
to the censure of Gad and Isaiah; but Asa was wroth
with Hanani and put him in prison, because the
prophet had ventured to rebuke him. His sin against
God corrupted even his civil administration; and
the ally of a heathen king, the persecutor of God's
prophet, also oppressed the people. Three years<note place='foot'>The date, as before, is peculiar to Chronicles.</note> after
the repulse of Baasha a new punishment fell upon
Asa: his feet became grievously diseased. Still he did
not humble himself, but was guilty of further sin<note place='foot'>xvi. 12<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>: he
sought not Jehovah, but the physicians. It is probable
that to seek Jehovah concerning disease was not merely
a matter of worship. Reuss has suggested that the
legitimate practice of medicine belonged to the schools
of the prophets; but it seems quite as likely that in
Judah, as in Egypt, any existing knowledge of the
art of healing was to be found among the priests.
Conversely physicians who were neither priests nor
prophets of Jehovah were almost certain to be ministers
of idolatrous worship and magicians. They failed
apparently to relieve their patient: Asa lingered in
pain and weakness for two years, and then died.
Possibly the sufferings of his latter days had protected
his people from further oppression, and had at once
appealed to their sympathy and removed any cause
for resentment. When he died, they only remembered
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
his virtues and achievements; and buried him with
royal magnificence, with sweet odours and divers kinds
of spices; and made a very great burning for him,
probably of aromatic woods.
</p>

<p>
In discussing the chronicler's picture of the good
kings, we have noticed that, while Chronicles and the
book of Kings agree in mentioning the misfortunes
which as a rule darkened their closing years, Chronicles
in each case records some lapse into sin as preceding
these misfortunes. From the theological standpoint of
the chronicler's school, these invidious records of the
sins of good kings were necessary in order to account
for their misfortunes. The devout student of the book
of Kings read with surprise that of the pious kings
who had been devoted to Jehovah and His temple,
whose acceptance by Him had been shown by the
victories vouchsafed to them, one had died of a
painful disease in his feet, another in a lazar-house,
two had been assassinated, and one slain in battle.
Why had faith and devotion been so ill rewarded?
Was it not vain to serve God? What profit was there
in keeping His ordinances? The chronicler felt himself
fortunate in discovering amongst his later authorities
additional information which explained these
mysteries and justified the ways of God to man. Even
the good kings had not been without reproach, and
their misfortunes had been the righteous judgment on
their sins.
</p>

<p>
The principle which guided the chronicler in this
selection of material was that sin was always punished
by complete, immediate, and manifest retribution in
this life, and that conversely all misfortune was the
punishment of sin. There is a simplicity and apparent
justice about this theory that has always made it the
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
leading doctrine of a certain stage of moral development.
It was probably the popular religious teaching in
Israel from early days till the time when our Lord found
it necessary to protest against the idea that the Galilæans
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices
were sinners above all Galilæans because they had
suffered these things, or that the eighteen upon whom
the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them, were offenders
above all the inhabitants of Jerusalem. This doctrine
of retribution was current among the Greeks. When
terrible calamities fell upon men, their neighbours
supposed these to be the punishment of specially
heinous crimes. When the Spartan king Cleomenes
committed suicide, the public mind in Greece at once
inquired of what particular sin he had thus paid the
penalty. The horrible circumstances of his death were
attributed to the wrath of some offended deity, and the
cause of the offence was sought for in one of his many
acts of sacrilege. Possibly he was thus punished
because he had bribed the priestess of the Delphic
oracle. The Athenians, however, believed that his
sacrilege had consisted in cutting down trees in their
sacred grove at Eleusis; but the Argives preferred to
hold that he came to an untimely end because he had
set fire to a grove sacred to their eponymous hero
Argos. Similarly, when in the course of the Peloponnesian
war the Æginetans were expelled from their
island, this calamity was regarded as a punishment
inflicted upon them because fifty years before they had
dragged away and put to death a suppliant who had
caught hold of the handle of the door of the temple
of Demeter Theomophorus. On the other hand, the
wonderful way in which on four or five occasions the
ravages of pestilence delivered Dionysius of Syracuse
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
from his Carthaginian enemies was attributed by his
admiring friends to the favour of the gods.
</p>

<p>
Like many other simple and logical doctrines, this
Jewish theory of retribution came into collision with
obvious facts, and seemed to set the law of God at
variance with the enlightened conscience. <q>Beneath
the simplest forms of truth the subtlest error lurks.</q>
The prosperity of the wicked and the sufferings of
the righteous were a standing religious difficulty to
the devout Israelite. The popular doctrine held its
ground tenaciously, supported not only by ancient
prescription, but also by the most influential classes
in society. All who were young, robust, wealthy,
powerful, or successful were interested in maintaining
a doctrine that made health, riches, rank, and success
the outward and visible signs of righteousness. Accordingly
the simplicity of the original doctrine was hedged
about with an ingenious and elaborate apologetic. The
prosperity of the wicked was held to be only for a
season; before he died the judgment of God would
overtake him. It was a mistake to speak of the sufferings
of the righteous: these very sufferings showed that
his righteousness was only apparent, and that in secret
he had been guilty of grievous sin.
</p>

<p>
Of all the cruelty inflicted in the name of orthodoxy
there is little that can surpass the refined torture due
to this Jewish apologetic. Its cynical teaching met the
sufferer in the anguish of bereavement, in the pain and
depression of disease, when he was crushed by sudden
and ruinous losses or publicly disgraced by the unjust
sentence of a venal law-court. Instead of receiving
sympathy and help, he found himself looked upon as a
moral outcast and pariah on account of his misfortunes;
when he most needed Divine grace, he was bidden to
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
regard himself as a special object of the wrath of
Jehovah. If his orthodoxy survived his calamities, he
would review his past life with morbid retrospection,
and persuade himself that he had indeed been guilty
above all other sinners.
</p>

<p>
The book of Job is an inspired protest against the
current theory of retribution, and the full discussion of
the question belongs to the exposition of that book.
But the narrative of Chronicles, like much Church
history in all ages, is largely controlled by the controversial
interests of the school from which it emanated.
In the hands of the chronicler the story of the kings
of Judah is told in such a way that it becomes a polemic
against the book of Job. The tragic and disgraceful
death of good kings presented a crucial difficulty to the
chronicler's theology. A good man's other misfortunes
might be compensated for by prosperity in his latter
days; but in a theory of retribution which required a
complete satisfaction of justice in this life there could
be no compensation for a dishonourable death. Hence
the chronicler's anxiety to record any lapses of good
kings in their latter days.
</p>

<p>
The criticism and correction of this doctrine belongs,
as we have said, to the exposition of the book of Job.
Here we are rather concerned to discover the permanent
truth of which the theory is at once an imperfect and
exaggerated expression. To begin with, there are sins
which bring upon the transgressor a swift, obvious, and
dramatic punishment. Human law deals thus with some
sins; the laws of health visit others with a similar
severity; at times the Divine judgment strikes down
men and nations before an awe-stricken world. Amongst
such judgments we might reckon the punishments of
royal sins so frequent in the pages of Chronicles.
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
God's judgments are not usually so immediate and
manifest, but these striking instances illustrate and
enforce the certain consequences of sin. We are dealing
now with cases in which God was set at nought;
and, apart from Divine grace, the votaries of sin are
bound to become its slaves and victims. Ruskin has
said, <q>Medicine often fails of its effect, but poison
never; and while, in summing the observation of past
life not unwatchfully spent, I can truly say that I have
a thousand times seen Patience disappointed of her
hope and Wisdom of her aim, I have never yet seen
folly fruitless of mischief, nor vice conclude but in
calamity.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Time and Tide</hi>, xii. 67.</note> Now that we have been brought into a
fuller light and delivered from the practical dangers of
the ancient Israelite doctrine, we can afford to forget
the less satisfactory aspects of the chronicler's teaching,
and we must feel grateful to him for enforcing the
salutary and necessary lesson that sin brings inevitable
punishment, and that therefore, whatever present
appearances may suggest, <q>the world was certainly
not framed for the lasting convenience of hypocrites,
libertines, and oppressors.</q><note place='foot'>George Eliot, <hi rend='italic'>Romola</hi>, xxi.</note>
</p>

<p>
Indeed, the consequences of sin are regular and exact;
and the judgments upon the kings of Judah in Chronicles
accurately symbolise the operations of Divine discipline.
But pain, and ruin, and disgrace are only secondary
elements in God's judgments; and most often they are
not judgments at all. They have their uses as chastisements;
but if we dwell upon them with too emphatic an
insistence, men suppose that pain is a worse evil than
sin, and that sin is only to be avoided because it
causes suffering to the sinner. The really serious
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
consequence of evil acts is the formation and confirmation
of evil character. Herbert Spencer says in
his <hi rend='italic'>First Principles</hi><note place='foot'>Part II., Chap. IX.</note> <q>that motion once set up along
any line becomes itself a cause of subsequent motion
along that line.</q> This is absolutely true in moral and
spiritual dynamics: every wrong thought, feeling, word,
or act, every failure to think, feel, speak, or act rightly,
at once alters a man's character for the worse. Henceforth
he will find it easier to sin and more difficult to
do right; he has twisted another strand into the cord
of habit: and though each may be as fine as the threads
of a spider's web, in time there will be cords strong
enough to have bound Samson before Delilah shaved
off his seven locks. This is the true punishment of
sin: to lose the fine instincts, the generous impulses,
and the nobler ambitions of manhood, and become
every day more of a beast and a devil.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Jehoshaphat&mdash;The Doctrine Of Non-Resistance.
2 Chron. xvii.-xx.</head>

<p>
Asa was succeeded by his son Jehoshaphat, and his
reign began even more auspiciously<note place='foot'>xvii., peculiar to Chronicles.</note> than that of
Asa. The new king had apparently taken warning
from the misfortunes of Asa's closing years; and as he
was thirty-five years old when he came to the throne,
he had been trained before Asa fell under the Divine
displeasure. He walked in the first ways of his father
David, before David was led away by Satan to number
Israel. Jehoshaphat's heart was lifted up, not with
foolish pride, like Hezekiah's, but <q>in the ways of
Jehovah.</q> He sought the God of his father, and
walked in God's commandments, and was not led astray
by the evil example and influence of the kings of Israel,
neither did he seek the Baals. While Asa had been
enfeebled by illness and alienated from Jehovah, the
high places and the Asherim had sprung up again like
a crop of evil weeds; but Jehoshaphat once more
removed them. According to the chronicler, this removing
of high places was a very labour of Sisyphus:
the stone was no sooner rolled up to the top of the hill
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
than it rolled down again. Jehoshaphat seems to have
had an inkling of this; he felt that the destruction of
idolatrous sanctuaries and symbols was like mowing
down weeds and leaving the roots in the soil. Accordingly
he made an attempt to deal more radically with
the evil: he would take away the inclination as well as
the opportunity for corrupt rites. A commission of
princes, priests, and Levites was sent throughout all
the cities of Judah to instruct the people in the law of
Jehovah. Vice will always find opportunities; it is
little use to suppress evil institutions unless the people
are educated out of evil propensities. If, for instance,
every public-house in England were closed to-morrow,
and there were still millions of throats craving for
drink, drunkenness would still prevail, and a new
administration would promptly reopen gin-shops.
</p>

<p>
Because the new king thus earnestly and consistently
sought the God of his fathers, Jehovah was with him,
and established the kingdom in his hand. Jehoshaphat
received all the marks of Divine favour usually bestowed
upon good kings. He waxed great exceedingly; he
had many fortresses, an immense army, and much
wealth; he built castles and cities of store; he had
arsenals for the supply of war material in the cities of
Judah. And these cities, together with other defensible
positions and the border cities of Ephraim occupied by
Judah, were held by strong garrisons. While David
had contented himself with two hundred and eighty-eight
thousand men from all Israel, and Abijah had led
forth four hundred thousand, and Asa five hundred and
eighty thousand, there waited on Jehoshaphat, in
addition to his numerous garrisons, <emph>eleven hundred and
sixty thousand men</emph>. Of these seven hundred and eighty
thousand were men of Judah in three divisions, and
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
three hundred and eighty thousand were Benjamites in
two divisions. Probably the steady increase of the
armies of Abijah, Asa, and Jehoshaphat symbolises a
proportionate increase of Divine favour.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler records the names of the captains of
the five divisions. Two of them are singled out for
special commendation: Eliada the Benjamite is styled
<q>a mighty man of valour,</q> and of the Jewish captain
Amaziah the son of Zichri it is said that he offered
either himself or his possessions willingly to Jehovah,
as David and his princes had offered, for the building
of the Temple. The devout king had devout officers.
</p>

<p>
He had also devoted subjects. All Judah brought him
presents, so that he had great riches and ample means
to sustain his royal power and splendour. Moreover,
as in the case of Solomon and Asa, his piety was
rewarded with freedom from war: <q>The fear of
Jehovah fell upon all the kingdoms round about, so
that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.</q> Some of
his weaker neighbours were overawed by the spectacle
of his great power; the Philistines brought him presents
and tribute money, and the Arabians immense flocks of
rams and he-goats, seven thousand seven hundred of
each.
</p>

<p>
Great prosperity had the usual fatal effect upon
Jehoshaphat's character. In the beginning of his reign
he had strengthened himself against Israel and had
refused to walk in their ways; now power had
developed ambition, and he sought and obtained the
honour of marrying his son Jehoram to Athaliah the
daughter of Ahab, the mighty and magnificent king of
Israel, possibly also the daughter of the Phœnician
princess Jezebel, the devotee of Baal. This family connection
of course implied political alliance. After a time
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
Jehoshaphat went down to visit his new ally, and was
hospitably received.<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xviii. 1-3.</note>
</p>

<p>
Then follows the familiar story of Micaiah the son
of Imlah, the disastrous expedition of the two kings,
and the death of Ahab, almost exactly as in the book
of Kings. There is one significant alteration: both
narratives tell us how the Syrian captains attacked
Jehoshaphat because they took him for the king of
Israel and gave up their pursuit when he cried out,
and they discovered their mistake; but the chronicler
adds the explanation that Jehovah helped him and
God moved them to depart from him. And so the
master of more than a million soldiers was happy in
being allowed to escape on account of his insignificance,
and returned in peace to Jerusalem. Oded and
Hanani had met his predecessors on their return from
victory; now Jehu the son of Hanani<note place='foot'>xix. 1-3, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> met Jehoshaphat
when he came home defeated. Like his father, the
prophet was charged with a message of rebuke. An
alliance with the northern kingdom was scarcely less
reprehensible than one with Syria: <q>Shouldest thou
help the wicked, and love them that hate Jehovah?
Jehovah is wroth with thee.</q> Asa's previous reforms
were not allowed to mitigate the severity of his condemnation,
but Jehovah was more merciful to Jehoshaphat.
The prophet makes mention of his piety and his destruction
of idolatrous symbols, and no further punishment
is inflicted upon him.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's addition to the account of the king's
escape from the Syrian captains reminds us that God
still watches over and protects His children even when
they are in the very act of sinning against Him.
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
Jehovah knew that Jehoshaphat's sinful alliance with
Ahab did not imply complete revolt and apostacy.
Hence doubtless the comparative mildness of the
prophet's reproof.
</p>

<p>
When Jehu's father Hanani rebuked Asa, the king
flew into a passion, and cast the prophet into prison;
Jehoshaphat received Jehu's reproof in a very different
spirit<note place='foot'>xix. 4-11, peculiar to Chronicles.</note>: he repented himself, and found a new zeal
in his penitence. Learning from his own experience
the proneness of the human heart to go astray, he
went out himself amongst his people to bring them
back to Jehovah; and just as Asa in his apostacy
oppressed his people, Jehoshaphat in his renewed
loyalty to Jehovah showed himself anxious for good
government. He provided judges in all the walled
towns of Judah, with a court of appeal at Jerusalem;
he solemnly charged them to remember their responsibility
to Jehovah, to avoid bribery, and not to truckle
to the rich and powerful. Being themselves faithful to
Jehovah, they were to inculcate a like obedience and
warn the people not to sin against the God of their
fathers. Jehoshaphat's exhortation to his new judges
concludes with a sentence whose martial resonance
suggests trial by combat rather than the peaceful proceedings
of a law-court: <q>Deal courageously, and
Jehovah defend the right!</q>
</p>

<p>
The principle that good government must be a
necessary consequence of piety in the rulers has not
been so uniformly observed in later times as in the
pages of Chronicles. The testimony of history on
this point is not altogether consistent. In spite of
all the faults of the orthodox and devout Greek
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
emperors Theodosius the Great and Marcian, their
administration rendered important services to the
empire. Alfred the Great was a distinguished statesman
and warrior as well as zealous for true religion.
St. Louis of France exercised a wise control over
Church and state. It is true that when a woman
reproached him in open court with being a king of
friars, of priests, and of clerks, and not a true king of
France, he replied with saintly meekness, <q>You say
true! It has pleased the Lord to make me king; it
had been well if it had pleased Him to make some one
king who had better ruled the realm.</q><note place='foot'>Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Latin Christianity</hi>, Book XI., Chap. I.</note> But something
must be allowed for the modesty of the saint; apart
from his unfortunate crusades, it would have been difficult
for France or even Europe to have furnished a more
beneficent sovereign. On the other hand, Charlemagne's
successor, the Emperor Louis the Pious, and our own
kings Edward the Confessor and the saintly Henry VI.,
were alike feeble and inefficient; the zeal of the Spanish
kings and their kinswoman Mary Tudor is chiefly remembered
for its ghastly cruelty; and in comparatively
recent times the misgovernment of the States of the
Church was a byword throughout Europe. Many
causes combined to produce this mingled record. The
one most clearly contrary to the chronicler's teaching
was an immoral opinion that the Christian should cease
to be a citizen, and that the saint has no duties to
society. This view is often considered to be the special
vice of monasticism, but it reappears in one form or
another in every generation. The failure of the administration
of Louis the Pious is partly explained
when we read that he was with difficulty prevented
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
from entering a monastery. In our own day there
are those who think that a newspaper should have
no interest for a really earnest Christian. According
to their ideas, Jehoshaphat should have divided his time
between a private oratory in his palace and the public
services of the Temple, and have left his kingdom to
the mercy of unjust judges at home and heathen enemies
abroad, or else have abdicated in favour of some
kinsman whose heart was not so perfect with Jehovah.
The chronicler had a clearer insight into Divine methods,
and this doctrine of his is not one that has been superseded
together with the Mosaic ritual.
</p>

<p>
Possibly the martial tone of the sentence that concludes
the account of Jehoshaphat as the Jewish
Justinian is due to the influence upon the chronicler's
mind of the incident<note place='foot'>xx. 1-30, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> which he now describes.
</p>

<p>
Jehoshaphat's next experience was parallel to that of
Asa with Zerah. When his new reforms were completed,
he was menaced with a formidable invasion.
His new enemies were almost as distant and strange as
the Ethiopians and Lubim who had followed Zerah.
We hear nothing about any king of Israel or Damascus,
the usual leaders of assaults upon Judah; we hear
instead of a triple alliance against Judah. Two of the
allies are Moab and Ammon; but the Jewish kings
were not wont to regard these as irresistible foes, so
that the extreme dismay which takes possession of king
and people must be due to the third ally: the
<q>Meunim.</q><note place='foot'>So R.V. marg., with the LXX. The Targum has <q>Edomites,</q> the
A.V. is not justified by the Hebrew, and the R.V. does not make sense.</note> The Meunim we have already met with
in connection with the exploits of the children of
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
Simeon in the reign of Hezekiah; they are also
mentioned in the reign of Uzziah,<note place='foot'>Cf. 1 Chron. iv. 41, R.V.; and 2 Chron. xxvi. 7.</note> and nowhere else,
unless indeed they are identical with the Maonites, who
are named with the Amalekites in Judges x. 12. They
are thus a people peculiar to Chronicles, and appear
from this narrative to have inhabited Mount Seir, by
which term <q>Meunim</q> is replaced as the story proceeds.<note place='foot'>One Hebrew manuscript is quoted as having this reading. A.R.V.,
with the ordinary Masoretic text, have <q>Syria</q>; but it is simply absurd
to suppose that a multitude from beyond the sea from Syria would first
make their appearance on the western shore of the Dead Sea.</note>
Since the chronicler wrote so long after the events he
describes, we cannot attribute to him any very exact
knowledge of political geography. Probably the term
<q>Meunim</q> impressed his contemporaries very much as
it does a modern reader, and suggested countless hordes
of Bedouin plunderers; Josephus calls them a great
army of Arabians. This host of invaders came from
Edom, and having marched round the southern end of
the Dead Sea, were now at Engedi, on its western shore.
The Moabites and Ammonites might have crossed the
Jordan by the fords near Jericho; but this route would
not have been convenient for their allies the Meunim,
and would have brought them into collision with the
forces of the northern kingdom.
</p>

<p>
On this occasion Jehoshaphat does not seek any
foreign alliance. He does not appeal to Syria, like Asa,
nor does he ask Ahab's successor to repay in kind the
assistance given to Ahab at Ramoth-gilead, partly
perhaps because there was no time, but chiefly because
he had learnt the truth which Hanani had sought to
teach his father, and which Hanani's son had taught
him. He does not even trust in his own hundreds of
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
thousands of soldiers, all of whom cannot have
perished at Ramoth-gilead; his confidence is placed
solely and absolutely in Jehovah. Jehoshaphat and his
people made no military preparations; subsequent events
justified their apparent neglect: none were necessary.
Jehoshaphat sought Divine help instead, and proclaimed
a fast throughout Judah; and all Judah gathered themselves
to Jerusalem to ask help of Jehovah. This
great national assembly met <q>before the new court</q>
of the Temple. The chronicler, who is supremely interested
in the Temple buildings, has told us nothing
about any new court, nor is it mentioned elsewhere;
our author is probably giving the title of a corresponding
portion of the second Temple: the place where the people
assembled to meet Jehoshaphat would be the great court
built by Solomon.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here Jehoshaphat stood up as the spokesman of the
nation, and prayed to Jehovah on their behalf and on
his own. He recalls the Divine omnipotence; Jehovah
is God of earth and heaven, God of Israel and Ruler
of the heathen, and therefore able to help even in this
great emergency:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>O Jehovah, God of our fathers, art Thou not God
in heaven? Dost Thou not rule all the kingdoms of
the heathen? And in Thy hand is power and might,
so that none is able to withstand Thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
The land of Israel had been the special gift of
Jehovah to His people, in fulfilment of His ancient
promise to Abraham:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Didst not Thou, O our God, dispossess the inhabitants
of this land in favour of Thy people Israel,
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
and gavest it to the seed of Abraham Thy friend for
ever?</q>
</p>

<p>
And now long possession had given Israel a prescriptive
right to the Land of Promise; and they had,
so to speak, claimed their rights in the most formal
and solemn fashion by erecting a temple to the God of
Israel. Moreover, the prayer of Solomon at the dedication
of the Temple had been accepted by Jehovah as
the basis of His covenant with Israel, and Jehoshaphat
quotes a clause from that prayer or covenant which
had expressly provided for such emergencies as the
present:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>And they</q> (Israel) <q>dwelt in the land, and built
Thee therein a sanctuary for Thy name, saying, If evil
come upon us, the sword, judgment, pestilence, or
famine, we will stand before this house and before
Thee (for Thy name is in this house), and cry unto
Thee in our affliction; and Thou wilt hear and save.</q><note place='foot'>Ver. 9; cf. 2 Chron. vi. 28, and the whole paragraph (vv. 22-30)
of which our verse is a brief abstract.</note>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the present invasion was not only an
attempt to set aside Jehovah's disposition of Palestine
and the long-established rights of Israel: it was also
gross ingratitude, a base return for the ancient forbearance
of Israel towards her present enemies:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab
and Mount Seir, whom Thou wouldest not let Israel
invade when they came out of the land of Egypt, but
they turned aside from them and destroyed them not&mdash;behold
how they reward us by coming to dispossess
us of Thy possession which Thou hast caused us to
possess.</q>
</p>

<p>
For this nefarious purpose the enemies of Israel had
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
come up in overwhelming numbers, but Judah was
confident in the justice of its cause and the favour of
Jehovah:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>O our God, wilt Thou not execute judgment
against them? for we have no might against this great
company that cometh against us, neither know we
what to do, but our eyes are upon Thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the great assemblage stood in the attitude
of supplication before Jehovah, not a gathering of
mighty men of valour praying for blessing upon their
strength and courage, but a mixed multitude, men and
women, children and infants, seeking sanctuary, as it
were, at the Temple, and casting themselves in their
extremity upon the protecting care of Jehovah. Possibly
when the king finished his prayer the assembly
broke out into loud, wailing cries of dismay and agonised
entreaty; but the silence of the narrative rather
suggests that Jehoshaphat's strong, calm faith communicated
itself to the people, and they waited quietly
for Jehovah's answer, for some token or promise of
deliverance. Instead of the confused cries of an excited
crowd, there was a hush of expectancy, such as sometimes
falls upon an assembly when a great statesman
has risen to utter words which will be big with the
fate of empires.
</p>

<p>
And the answer came, not by fire from heaven or
any visible sign, not by voice of thunder accompanied
by angelic trumpets, nor by angel or archangel, but
by a familiar voice hitherto unsuspected of any supernatural
gifts, by a prophetic utterance whose only
credentials were given by the influence of the Spirit
upon the speaker and his audience. The chronicler
relates with evident satisfaction how, in the midst of
that great congregation, the Spirit of Jehovah came,
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
not upon king, or priest, or acknowledged prophet, but
upon a subordinate minister of the Temple, a Levite
and member of the Temple choir like himself. He is
careful to fix the identity of this newly called prophet
and to gratify the family pride of existing Levitical
families by giving the prophet's genealogy for several
generations. He was Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the
son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, of
the sons of Asaph. The very names were encouraging.
What more suitable names could be found for a
messenger of Divine mercy than Jahaziel&mdash;<q>God gives
prophetic vision</q>&mdash;the son of Zechariah&mdash;<q>Jehovah
remembers</q>?
</p>

<p>
Jahaziel's message showed that Jehoshaphat's prayer
had been accepted; Jehovah responded without reserve
to the confidence reposed in Him: He would vindicate
His own authority by delivering Judah; Jehoshaphat
should have blessed proof of the immense superiority
of simple trust in Jehovah over an alliance with
Ahab or the king of Damascus. Twice the prophet
exhorts the king and people in the very words that
Jehovah had used to encourage Joshua when the
death of Moses had thrown upon him all the heavy
responsibilities of leadership: <q>Fear not, nor be
dismayed.</q> They need no longer cling like frightened
suppliants to the sanctuary, but are to go forth at once,
the very next day, against the enemy. That they may
lose no time in looking for them, Jehovah announces
the exact spot where the enemy are to be found:
<q>Behold, they are coming by the ascent of Hazziz,<note place='foot'>Not Ziz, as A.R.V.</note> and
ye shall find them at the end of the ravine before the
wilderness of Jeruel.</q> This topographical description
was doubtless perfectly intelligible to the chronicler's
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
contemporaries, but it is no longer possible to fix
exactly the locality of Hazziz or Jeruel. The ascent
of Hazziz has been identified with the Wady Husasa,
which leads up from the coast of the Dead Sea north of
Engedi, in the direction of Tekoa; but the identification
is by no means certain.
</p>

<p>
The general situation, however, is fairly clear: the
allied invaders would come up from the coast into the
highlands of Judah by one of the wadies leading inland;
they were to be met by Jehoshaphat and his people on
one of the <q>wildernesses,</q> or plateaus of pasture-land,
in the neighbourhood of Tekoa.
</p>

<p>
But the Jews went forth, not as an army, but in
order to be the passive spectators of a great manifestation
of the power of Jehovah. They had no concern
with the numbers and prowess of their enemies; Jehovah
Himself would lay bare His mighty arm, and Judah
should see that no foreign ally, no millions of native
warriors, were necessary for their salvation: <q>Ye shall
not need to fight in this battle; take up your position,
stand still and see the deliverance of Jehovah with
you, O Judah and Jerusalem.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus had Moses addressed Israel on the eve of the
passage of the Red Sea. Jehoshaphat and his people
owned and honoured the Divine message as if Jahaziel
were another Moses; they prostrated themselves on
the ground before Jehovah. The sons of Asaph had
already been privileged to provide Jehovah with His
prophet; these Asaphites represented the Levitical clan
of Gershom: but now the Kohathites, with their guild
of singers, the sons of Korah, <q>stood up to praise
Jehovah, the God of Israel, with an exceeding loud
voice,</q> as the Levites sang when the foundations of
the second Temple were laid, and when Ezra and
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
Nehemiah made the people enter into a new covenant
with their God.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly on the morrow the people rose early in
the morning and went out to the wilderness of Tekoa,
ten or twelve miles south of Jerusalem. In ancient
times generals were wont to make a set speech to their
armies before they led them into battle, so Jehoshaphat
addresses his subjects as they pass out before him.
He does not seek to make them confident in their own
strength and prowess; he does not inflame their passions
against Moab and Ammon, nor exhort them to be brave
and remind them that they fight this day for the ashes
of their fathers and the temple of their God. Such an
address would have been entirely out of place, because
the Jews were not going to fight at all. Jehoshaphat
only bids them have faith in Jehovah and His prophets.
It is a curious anticipation of Pauline teaching. Judah
is to be <q>saved by faith</q> from Moab and Ammon,
as the Christian is delivered by faith from sin and its
penalty. The incident might almost seem to have been
recorded in order to illustrate the truth that St. Paul
was to teach. It is strange that there is no reference
to this chapter in the epistles of St. Paul and St. James,
and that the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does
not remind us how <q>by faith Jehoshaphat was delivered
from Moab and Ammon.</q>
</p>

<p>
There is no question of military order, no reference
to the five great divisions into which the armies of
Judah and Benjamin are divided in chap. xvii. Here,
as at Jericho, the captain of Israel is chiefly concerned
to provide musicians to lead his army. When
David was arranging for the musical services before
the Ark, he took counsel with his captains. In this
unique military expedition there is no mention of
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
captains; they were not necessary, and if they were
present, there was no opportunity for them to show
their skill and prowess in battle. In an even more
democratic spirit Jehoshaphat takes counsel with the
people&mdash;that is, probably makes some proposition, which
is accepted with universal acclamation.
</p>

<p>
The Levitical singers, dressed in the splendid robes<note place='foot'>הדרת קדש, literally, as A.R.V., <q>beauty of holiness</q>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, sacred
robes. Translate with R.V. marg. <q>praise in the beauty of holiness,</q>
not, as A.R.V., <q>praise the beauty of holiness.</q></note>
in which they officiated at the Temple, were appointed
to go before the people, and offer praises unto Jehovah,
and sing the anthem, <q>Give thanks unto Jehovah, for
His mercy endureth for ever.</q> These words or their
equivalent are the opening words, and the second
clause the refrain, of the post-Exilic Psalms: cvi.,
cvii., cxviii., and cxxxvi. As the chronicler has already
ascribed Psalm cvi. to David, he possibly ascribes
all four to David, and intends us to understand that
one or all of them were sung by the Levites on this
occasion. Later Judaism was in the habit of denoting
a book or section of a book by its opening words.
</p>

<p>
And so Judah, a pilgrim caravan rather than an army,
went on to its Divinely appointed tryst with its enemies,
and at its head the Levitical choir sang the Temple
hymns. It was not a campaign, but a sacred function,
on a much larger scale a procession such as may be
seen winding its way, with chants and incense, banners,
images, and crucifixes, through the streets of Catholic
cities.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Jehovah was preparing a spectacle to
gladden the eyes of His people and reward their implicit
faith and exact obedience; He was working for
those who were waiting for Him. Though Judah was
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
still far from its enemies, yet, like the trumpet at Jericho,
the strain of praise and thanksgiving was the signal for
the Divine intervention: <q>When they began to sing
and praise, Jehovah set liers in wait against the children
of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir.</q> Who were these
liers in wait? They could not be men of Judah: <emph>they</emph>
were not to fight, but to be passive spectators of their
own deliverance. Did the allies set an ambush for
Judah, and was it thus that they were afterwards led
to mistake their own people for enemies? Or does the
chronicler intend us to understand that these <q>liers in
wait</q> were spirits; that the allied invaders were tricked
and bewildered like the shipwrecked sailors in the
<hi rend='italic'>Tempest</hi>; or that when they came to the wilderness of
Jeruel there fell upon them a spirit of mutual distrust,
jealousy, and hatred, that had, as it were, been waiting
for them there? But, from whatever cause, a quarrel
broke out amongst them; and they were smitten.
When Ammonite, Moabite, and Edomite met, there
were many private and public feuds waiting their
opportunity; and such confederates were as ready to
quarrel among themselves as a group of Highland
clans engaged in a Lowland foray. <q>Ammon and Moab
stood up against the inhabitants of Mount Seir utterly
to slay and destroy them.</q> But even Ammon and
Moab soon dissolved their alliance; and at last, partly
maddened by panic, partly intoxicated by a wild thirst
for blood, a very Berserker frenzy, all ties of friendship
and kindred were forgotten, and every man's hand was
against his brother. <q>When they had made an end of
the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy
another.</q>
</p>

<p>
While this tragedy was enacting, and the air was
rent with the cruel yells of that death struggle,
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
Jehoshaphat and his people moved on in tranquil pilgrimage
to the cheerful sound of the songs of Zion.
At last they reached an eminence, perhaps the long,
low summit of some ridge overlooking the plateau of
Jeruel. When they had gained this watchtower of
the wilderness, the ghastly scene burst upon their gaze.
Jehovah had kept His word: they had found their
enemy. They <q>looked upon the multitude,</q> all those
hordes of heathen tribes that had filled them with terror
and dismay. They were harmless enough now: the
Jews saw nothing but <q>dead bodies fallen to the
earth</q>; and in that Aceldama lay all the multitude of
profane invaders who had dared to violate the sanctity
of the Promised Land: <q>There were none that
escaped.</q> So had Israel looked back after crossing
the Red Sea and seen the corpses of the Egyptians
washed up on the shore.<note place='foot'>Exod. xiv. 30.</note> So when the angel of
Jehovah smote Sennacherib,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Like the leaves of the forest when autumn hath blown,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>That host on the morrow lay withered and strown.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There is no touch of pity for the wretched victims
of their own sins. Greeks of every city and tribe
could feel the pathos of the tragic end of the Athenian
expedition against Syracuse; but the Jews had no ruth
for the kindred tribes that dwelt along their frontier,
and the age of the chronicler had not yet learnt that
Jehovah had either tenderness or compassion for the
enemies of Israel.
</p>

<p>
The spectators of this carnage&mdash;we cannot call them
victors&mdash;did not neglect to profit to the utmost by
their great opportunity. They spent three days in
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
stripping the dead bodies; and as Orientals delight
in jewelled weapons and costly garments, and their
chiefs take the field with barbaric ostentation of
wealth, the spoil was both valuable and abundant:
<q>riches, and raiment,<note place='foot'>With R.V. marg.</note> and precious jewels, ... more
than they could carry away.</q>
</p>

<p>
In collecting the spoil, the Jews had become dispersed
through all the wide area over which the fighting
between the confederates must have extended; but on
the fourth day they gathered together again in a
neighbouring valley and gave solemn thanks for their
deliverance: <q>There they blessed Jehovah; therefore
the name of that place was called the valley of Berachah
unto this day.</q> West of Tekoa,<note place='foot'>The identification of the valley of Berachah with the valley of
Jehoshaphat, close to Jerusalem and mentioned by Josephus, is a mere
theory, quite at variance with the topographical evidence.</note> not too far from the
scene of carnage, a ruin and a wady still bear the name
<q>Bereikut</q>; and doubtless in the chronicler's time the
valley was called Berachah, and local tradition furnished
our author with this explanation of the origin of the
name.
</p>

<p>
When the spoil was all collected, they returned to
Jerusalem as they came, in solemn procession, headed,
no doubt, by the Levites, with psalteries, and harps, and
trumpets. They came back to the scene of their anxious
supplications: to the house of Jehovah. But yesterday,
as it were, they had assembled before Jehovah, terror-stricken
at the report of an irresistible host of invaders;
and to-day their enemies were utterly destroyed. They
had experienced a deliverance that might rank with
the Exodus; and as at that former deliverance they
had spoiled the Egyptians, so now they had returned
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
laden with the plunder of Moab, Ammon, and Edom.
And all their neighbours were smitten with fear when
they heard of the awful ruin which Jehovah had brought
upon these enemies of Israel. No one would dare to
invade a country where Jehovah laid a ghostly ambush
of liers in wait for the enemies of His people. The
realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet, not because he was
protected by powerful allies or by the swords of his
numerous and valiant soldiers, but because Judah had
become another Eden, and cherubim with flaming
swords guarded the frontier on every hand, and <q>his
God gave him rest round about.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then follow the regular summary and conclusion of
the history of the reign taken from the book of Kings,
with the usual alterations in the reference to further
sources of information. We are told here, in direct
contradiction to xvii. 6 and to the whole tenor of the
previous chapters, that the high places were not taken
away, another illustration of the slight importance the
chronicler attached to accuracy in details. He either
overlooks the contradiction between passages borrowed
from different sources, or else does not think it worth
while to harmonise his inconsistent materials.
</p>

<p>
But after the narrative of the reign is thus formally
closed the chronicler inserts a postscript, perhaps by
a kind of after-thought. The book of Kings narrates<note place='foot'>Kings xxii. 48, 49.</note>
how Jehoshaphat made ships to go to Ophir for gold,
but they were broken at Ezion-geber; then Ahaziah
the son of Ahab proposed to enter into partnership
with Jehoshaphat, and the latter rejected his proposal.
As we have seen, the chronicler's theory of retribution
required some reason why so pious a king experienced
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
misfortune. What sin had Jehoshaphat committed to
deserve to have his ships broken? The chronicler has
a new version of the story, which provides an answer
to this question. Jehoshaphat did not build any ships
by himself; his unfortunate navy was constructed in
partnership with Ahaziah; and accordingly the prophet
Eliezer rebuked him for allying himself a second time
with a wicked king of Israel, and announced the
coming wreck of the ships. And so it came about that
the ships were broken, and the shadow of Divine displeasure
rested on the last days of Jehoshaphat.
</p>

<p>
We have next to notice the chronicler's most important
omissions. The book of Kings narrates another
alliance of Jehoshaphat with Jehoram, king of Israel,
like his alliances with Ahab and Ahaziah. The narrative
of this incident closely resembles that of the
earlier joint expedition to Ramoth-gilead. As then
Jehoshaphat marched out with Ahab, so now he accompanies
Ahab's son Jehoram, taking with him his subject
ally the king of Edom. Here also a prophet appears
upon the scene; but on this occasion Elisha addresses
no rebuke to Jehoshaphat for his alliance with Israel,
but treats him with marked respect: and the allied
army wins a great victory. If this narrative had been
included in Chronicles, the reign of Jehoshaphat would
not have afforded an altogether satisfactory illustration
of the main lesson which the chronicler intended it
to teach.
</p>

<p>
This main lesson was that the chosen people should
not look for protection against their enemies either to
foreign alliances or to their own military strength, but
solely to the grace and omnipotence of Jehovah. One
negative aspect of this principle has been enforced by
the condemnation of Asa's alliance with Syria and
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
Jehoshaphat's with Ahab and Ahaziah. Later on the
uselessness of an army apart from Jehovah is shown in
the defeat of <q>the great host</q> of Joash by <q>a small
company</q> of Syrians.<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxiv. 24, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> The positive aspect has been
partially illustrated by the signal victories of Abijah and
Asa against overwhelming odds and without the help
of any foreign allies. But these were partial and
unsatisfactory illustrations: Jehovah vouchsafed to
share the glory of these victories with great armies
that were numbered by the hundred thousand. And
after all, the odds were not so very overwhelming.
Scores of parallels may be found in which the odds were
much greater. In the case of vast Oriental hosts
a superiority of two to one might easily be counterbalanced
by discipline and valour in the smaller army.
</p>

<p>
The peculiar value to the chronicler of the deliverance
from Moab, Ammon, and the Meunim lay in the fact
that no human arm divided the glory with Jehovah.
It was shown conclusively not merely that Judah could
safely be contented with an army smaller than those of
its neighbours, but that Judah would be equally safe
with no army at all. We feel that this lesson is taught
with added force when we remember that Jehoshaphat
had a larger army than is ascribed to any Israelite or
Jewish king after David. Yet he places no confidence
in his eleven hundred and sixty thousand warriors, and
he is not allowed to make any use of them. In the case
of a king with small military resources, to trust in
Jehovah might be merely making a virtue of necessity;
but if Jehoshaphat, with his immense army, felt that his
only real help was in his God, the example furnished
an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à fortiori</foreign> argument which would conclusively show
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
that it was always the duty and privilege of the Jews to
say with the Psalmist, <q>Some trust in chariots, and
some in horses; but we will remember the name of
Jehovah our God.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm xx. 7.</note> The ancient literature of Israel
furnished other illustrations of the principle: at the Red
Sea the Israelites had been delivered without any
exercise of their own warlike prowess; at Jericho, as at
Jeruel, the enemy had been completely overthrown by
Jehovah before His people rushed upon the spoil;
and the same direct Divine intervention saved Jerusalem
from Sennacherib. But the later history of the Jews
had been a series of illustrations of enforced dependence
upon Jehovah. A little semi-ecclesiastical community
inhabiting a small province that passed from one great
power to another like a counter in the game of international
politics had no choice but to trust in Jehovah,
if it were in any way to maintain its self-respect. For
this community of the second Temple to have had
confidence in its sword and bow would have seemed
equally absurd to the Jews and to their Persian and
Greek masters.
</p>

<p>
When they were thus helpless, Jehovah wrought
for Israel, as He had destroyed the enemies of
Jehoshaphat in the wilderness of Jeruel. The Jews
stood still and saw the working out of their deliverance;
great empires wrestled together like Moab, Ammon, and
Edom, in the agony of the death struggle: and over all
the tumult of battle Israel heard the voice of Jehovah,
<q>The battle is not yours, but God's; ... set yourselves,
stand ye still, and see the deliverance of Jehovah with
you, O Judah and Jerusalem.</q> Before their eyes there
passed the scenes of that great drama which for a time
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
gave Western Asia Aryan instead of Semitic masters.
For them the whole action had but one meaning:
without calling Israel into the field, Jehovah was
devoting to destruction the enemies of His people and
opening up a way for His redeemed to return, like
Jehoshaphat's procession, to the Holy City and the
Temple. The long series of wars became a wager
of battle, in which Israel, herself a passive spectator,
appeared by her Divine Champion; and the assured
issue was her triumphant vindication and restoration
to her ancient throne in Zion.
</p>

<p>
After the Restoration God's protecting providence
asked no armed assistance from Judah. The mandates
of a distant court authorised the rebuilding of the
Temple and the fortifying of the city. The Jews
solaced their national pride and found consolation for
their weakness and subjection in the thought that their
ostensible masters were in reality only the instruments
which Jehovah used to provide for the security and
prosperity of His children.
</p>

<p>
We have already noticed that this philosophy of
history is not peculiar to Israel. Every nation has a
similar system, and regards its own interests as the
supreme care of Providence. We have seen, too, that
moral influences have controlled and checkmated
material forces; God has fought against the biggest
battalions. Similarly the Jews are not the only people
for whom deliverances have been worked out almost
without any co-operation on their own part. It was not
a negro revolt, for instance, that set free the slaves of
our colonies or of the Southern States. Italy regained
her Eternal City as an incidental effect of a great war
in which she herself took no part. Important political
movements and great struggles involve consequences
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
equally unforeseen and unintended by the chief actors
in these dramas, consequences which would seem to
them insignificant compared with more obvious results.
Some obscure nation almost ready to perish is given a
respite, a breathing space, in which it gathers strength;
instead of losing its separate existence, it endures till
time and opportunity make it one of the ruling influences
in the world's history: some Geneva or
Wittenberg becomes, just at the right time, a secure
refuge and vantage-ground for one of the Lord's
prophets. Our understanding of what God is doing in
our time and our hopes for what He may yet do will
indeed be small, if we think that God can do nothing
for our cause unless our banner flies in the forefront
of the battle, and the war-cry is <q>The sword of Gideon!</q>
as well as <q>The sword of Jehovah!</q> There will be
many battles fought in which we shall strike no blow
and yet be privileged to divide the spoil. We sometimes
<q>stand still and see the salvation of Jehovah.</q>
</p>

<p>
The chronicler has found disciples in these latter
days of a kindlier spirit and more catholic sympathies.
He and they have reached their common doctrines by
different paths, but the chronicler teaches non-resistance
as clearly as the Society of Friends. <q>When you have
fully yielded yourself to the Divine teaching,</q> he says,
<q>you will neither fight yourself nor ask others to fight
for you; you will simply stand still and watch a Divine
providence protecting you and destroying your enemies.</q>
The Friends could almost echo this teaching, not
perhaps laying quite so much stress on the destruction
of the enemy, though among the visions of the earlier
Friends there were many that revealed the coming judgments
of the Lord; and the modern enthusiast is still apt
to consider that his enemies, are the Lord's enemies and
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
to call the gratification of his own revengeful spirit a
vindicating of the honour of the Lord and a satisfaction
of outraged justice.
</p>

<p>
If the chronicler had lived to-day, the history of the
Society of Friends might have furnished him with
illustrations almost as apt as the destruction of the
allied invaders of Judah. He would have rejoiced to
tell us how a people that repudiated any resort to
violence succeeded in conciliating savage tribes and
founding the flourishing colony of Pennsylvania, and
would have seen the hand of the Lord in the wealth
and honour that have been accorded to a once despised
and persecuted sect.
</p>

<p>
We should be passing to matters that were still
beyond the chronicler's horizon, if we were to connect
his teaching with our Lord's injunction, <q>Whosoever
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also.</q> Such a sentiment scarcely harmonises
with the three days' stripping of dead bodies in the
wilderness of Jeruel. But though the chronicler's
motives for non-resistance were not touched and
softened with the Divine gentleness of Jesus of
Nazareth, and his object was not to persuade his
hearers to patient endurance of wrong, yet he had
conceived the possibility of a mighty faith that could
put its fortunes unreservedly into the hands of God
and trust Him with the issues. If we are ever to be
worthy citizens of the kingdom of our Lord, it can only
be by the sustaining power and inspiring influence of
a like faith.
</p>

<p>
When we come to ask how far the people for whom
he wrote responded to his teaching and carried it
into practical life, we are met with one of the many
instances of the grim irony of history. Probably the
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
chronicler's glowing vision of peaceful security, guarded
on every hand by legions of angels, was partly
inspired by the comparative prosperity of the time at
which he wrote. Other considerations combine with
this to suggest that the composition of his work
beguiled the happy leisure of one of the brighter
intervals between Ezra and the Maccabees.
</p>

<p>
Circumstances were soon to test the readiness of the
Jews, in times of national danger, to observe the
attitude of passive spectators and wait for a Divine
deliverance. It was not altogether in this spirit that the
priests met the savage persecutions of Antiochus. They
made no vain attempts to exorcise this evil spirit with
hymns, and psalteries, and harps, and trumpets; but the
priest Mattathias and his sons slew the king's commissioner
and raised the standard of armed revolt. We do
indeed find indications of something like obedience to
the chronicler's principles. A body of the revolted
Jews were attacked on the Sabbath Day; they made no
attempt to defend themselves: <q>When they gave them
battle with all speed, they answered them not, neither
cast they a stone at them, nor stopped the places
where they lay hid, ... and their enemies rose up
against them on the sabbath, and slew them, with their
wives, and their children, and their cattle, to the number
of a thousand people.</q><note place='foot'>1 Macc. ii. 35-38.</note> No Divine intervention
rewarded this devoted faith, nor apparently did the
Jews expect it, for they had said, <q>Let us die all in our
innocency; heaven and earth shall testify for us that
ye put us to death wrongfully.</q> This is, after all, a
higher note than that of Chronicles: obedience may not
bring invariable reward; nevertheless the faithful will
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
not swerve from their loyalty. But the priestly leaders
of the people looked with no favourable eye upon this
offering up of human hecatombs in honour of the
sanctity of the Sabbath. They were not prepared to
die passively; and, as representatives of Jehovah and
of the nation for the time being, they decreed that
henceforth they would fight against those who attacked
them, even on the Sabbath Day. Warfare on these
more secular principles was crowned with that visible
success which the chronicler regarded as the manifest
sign of Divine approval; and a dynasty of royal priests
filled the throne and led the armies of Israel, and
assured and strengthened their authority by intrigues
and alliances with every heathen sovereign within their
reach.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Jehoram, Ahaziah, and Athaliah: The Consequences
of a Foreign Marriage. 2 Chron. xxi.-xxiii.</head>

<p>
The accession of Jehoram is one of the instances
in which a wicked son succeeded to a conspicuously
pious father, but in this case there is no
difficulty in explaining the phenomenon: the depraved
character and evil deeds of Jehoram, Ahaziah, and
Athaliah are at once accounted for when we remember
that they were respectively the son-in-law, grandson,
and daughter of Ahab, and possibly of Jezebel. If,
however, Jezebel were really the mother of Athaliah,
it is difficult to believe that the chronicler understood
or at any rate realised the fact. In the books of Ezra
and Nehemiah the chronicler lays great stress upon the
iniquity and inexpediency of marriage with strange
wives, and he has been careful to insert a note into the
history of Jehoshaphat to call attention to the fact that
the king of Judah had joined affinity with Ahab. If he
had understood that this implied joining affinity with
a Phœnician devotee of Baal, this significant fact would
not have been passed over in silence. Moreover, the
names Athaliah and Ahaziah are both compounded
with the sacred name Jehovah. A Phœnician Baal-worshipper
may very well have been sufficiently eclectic
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
to make such use of the name sacred to the family into
which she married, but on the whole those names
rather tell against the descent of their owners from
Jezebel and her Zidonian ancestors.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that, after giving the concluding
formula for the reign of Jehoshaphat, the chronicler
adds a postscript narrating an incident discreditable
to the king. Similarly he prefaces the introductory
formula for the reign of Jehoram by inserting a cruel
deed of the new king. Before telling us Jehoram's age
at his accession and the length of his reign, the
chronicler relates<note place='foot'>xxi. 2-4, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> the steps taken by Jehoram to
secure himself upon his throne. Jehoshaphat, like
Rehoboam, had disposed of his numerous sons in the
fenced cities of Judah, and had sought to make them
quiet and contented by providing largely for their
material welfare: <q>Their father gave them great gifts:
silver, gold, and precious things, with fenced cities in
Judah.</q> The sanguine judgment of paternal affection
might expect that these gifts would make his younger
sons loyal and devoted subjects of their elder brother;
but Jehoram, not without reason, feared that treasure
and cities might supply the means for a revolt, or that
Judah might be split up into a number of small principalities.
Accordingly when he had strengthened himself
he slew all his brethren with the sword, and with
them those princes of Israel whom he suspected of
attachment to his other victims. He was following
the precedent set by Solomon when he ordered the
execution of Adonijah; and, indeed, the slaughter by
a new sovereign of all those near relations who might
possibly dispute his claim to the throne has usually
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
been considered in the East to be a painful but necessary
and perfectly justifiable act, being, in fact, regarded
in much the same light as the drowning of superfluous
kittens in domestic circles. Probably this episode is
placed before the introductory formula for the reign
because until these possible rivals were removed
Jehoram's tenure of the throne was altogether unsafe.
</p>

<p>
For the next few verses<note place='foot'>Vv. 5-10; cf. 2 Kings viii. 17-22.</note> the narrative follows the
book of Kings with scarcely any alteration, and states
the evil character of the new reign, accounting for
Jehoram's depravity by his marriage with a daughter
of Ahab. The successful revolt of Edom from Judah
is next given, and the chronicler adds a note of his
own to the effect that Jehoram experienced these
reverses because he had forsaken Jehovah, the God
of his fathers.
</p>

<p>
Then the chronicler proceeds<note place='foot'>xxi. 11-19, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> to describe further
sins and misfortunes of Jehoram. He mentions
definitely, what is doubtless implied by the book of
Kings, that Jehoram made high places in the cities of
Judah<note place='foot'>So R.V. marg., with LXX. and Vulgate A.R.V. have <q>mountains,</q>
with Masoretic text.</note> and seduced the people into taking part in a
corrupt worship. The Divine condemnation of the
king's wrong-doing came from an unexpected quarter and
in an unusual fashion. The other prophetic messages
specially recorded by the chronicler were uttered by
prophets of Judah, some apparently receiving their
inspiration for one particular occasion. The prophet
who rebuked Jehoram was no less distinguished a
personage than the great Israelite Elijah, who, according
to the book of Kings, had long since been translated
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
to heaven. In the older narrative Elijah's work is
exclusively confined to the northern kingdom. But
the chronicler entirely ignores Elijah, except when his
history becomes connected for a moment with that of
the house of David.
</p>

<p>
The other prophets of Judah delivered their messages
by word of mouth, but this communication is made by
means of <q>a writing.</q> This, however, is not without
parallel: Jeremiah sent a letter to the captives in
Babylon, and also sent a written collection of his prophecies
to Jehoiakim.<note place='foot'>Jer. xxix.; xxxvi.</note> In the latter case, however, the
prophecies had been originally promulgated by word
of mouth.
</p>

<p>
Elijah writes in the name of Jehovah, the God of
David, and condemns Jehoram because he was not
walking in the ways of Asa and Jehoshaphat, but in the
ways of the kings of Israel and the house of Ahab. It
is pleasant to find that, in spite of the sins which
marked the latter days of Asa and Jehoshaphat, their
<q>ways</q> were as a whole such as could be held up as an
example by the prophet of Jehovah. Here and elsewhere
God appeals to the better feelings that spring
from pride of birth. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Noblesse oblige.</foreign> Jehoram held
his throne as representative of the house of David, and
was proud to trace his descent to the founder of the
Israelite monarchy and to inherit the glory of the great
reigns of Asa and Jehoshaphat; but this pride of race
implied that to depart from their ways was dishonourable
apostacy. There is no more pitiful spectacle than
an effeminate libertine pluming himself on his noble
ancestry.
</p>

<p>
Elijah further rebukes Jehoram for the massacre of
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
his brethren, who were better than himself. They had
all grown up at their father's court, and till the other
brethren were put in possession of their fenced cities
had been under the same influences. It is the husband
of Ahab's daughter who is worse than all the rest; the
influence of an unsuitable marriage has already begun
to show itself. Indeed, in view of Athaliah's subsequent
history, we do her no injustice by supposing that, like
Jezebel and Lady Macbeth, she had suggested her
husband's crime. The fact that Jehoram's brethren
were better men than himself adds to his guilt morally,
but this undesirable superiority of the other princes
of the blood to the reigning sovereign would seem
to Jehoram and his advisers an additional reason for
putting them out of the way; the massacre was an
urgent political necessity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Truly the tender mercies of the weak,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>As of the wicked, are but cruel.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There is nothing so cruel as the terror of a selfish
man. The Inquisition is the measure not only of the
inhumanity, but also of the weakness, of the mediæval
Church; and the massacre of St. Bartholomew was due
to the feebleness of Charles IX. as well as to the
<q>revenge or the blind instinct of self-preservation</q><note place='foot'>Green's <hi rend='italic'>Shorter History</hi>, p. 404.</note> of
Mary de Medici.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's condemnation of Jehoram's massacre
marks the superiority of the standard of later Judaism
to the current Oriental morality. For his sins Jehoram
was to be punished by sore disease and by a great
<q>plague</q> which would fall upon his people, and his
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
wives, and his children, and all his substance. From
the following verses we see that <q>plague,</q> here as in
the case of some of the plagues of Egypt, has the sense
of calamity generally, and not the narrower meaning
of pestilence. This plague took the form of an
invasion of the Philistines and of the Arabians <q>which
are beside the Ethiopians.</q> Divine inspiration prompted
them to attack Judah; Jehovah stirred up their spirit
against Jehoram. Probably here, as in the story of
Zerah, the term Ethiopians is used loosely for the
Egyptians, in which case the Arabs in question would
be inhabitants of the desert between the south of
Palestine and Egypt, and would thus be neighbours of
their Philistine allies.
</p>

<p>
These marauding bands succeeded where the huge
hosts of Zerah had failed; they broke into Judah, and
carried off all the king's treasure, together with his sons
and his wives, only leaving him his youngest son:
Jehoahaz or Ahaziah. They afterwards slew the princes
they had taken captive.<note place='foot'>xxii. 1<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> The common people would
scarcely suffer less severely than their king. Jehoram
himself was reserved for special personal punishment:
Jehovah smote him with a sore disease; and, like
Asa, he lingered for two years and then died. The
people were so impressed by his wickedness that <q>they
made no burning for him, like the burning of his
fathers,</q> whereas they had made a very great burning
for Asa.<note place='foot'>The Hebrew original of the A.R.V., <q>departed without being
desired,</q> is as obscure as the English of our versions. The most
probable translation is, <q>He behaved so as to please no one.</q> The
A.R.V. apparently mean that no one regretted his death.</note>
</p>

<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>

<p>
The chronicler's account of the reign of Ahaziah<note place='foot'>We need not discuss in detail the question of Ahaziah's age at his
accession. The age of forty-two, given in 2 Chron. xxii. 2, is simply
impossible, seeing that his father was only forty years old when he
died. The Peshito and Arabic versions have followed 2 Kings viii.
26, and altered forty-two to twenty-two; and the LXX. reads twenty
years. But twenty-two years still presents difficulties. According to
this reading, Ahaziah, Jehoram's youngest son, was born when his
father was only eighteen, and Jehoram having had several sons before
the age of eighteen, had none afterwards.</note>
does not differ materially from that given by the book
of Kings, though it is considerably abridged, and there
are other minor alterations. The chronicler sets forth
even more emphatically than the earlier history the
evil influence of Athaliah and her Israelite kinsfolk over
Ahaziah's short reign of one year. The story of his
visit to Jehoram, king of Israel, and the murder of the
two kings by Jehu, is very much abridged. The
chronicler carefully omits all reference to Elisha,
according to his usual principle of ignoring the religious
life of Northern Israel; but he expressly tells us that,
like Jehoshaphat, Ahaziah suffered for consorting with
the house of Omri: <q>His destruction or treading down
was of God in that he went unto Jehoram.</q> Our English
versions have carefully reproduced an ambiguity in
the original; but it seems probable that the chronicler
does not mean that visiting Jehoram in his illness was
a flagrant offence which God punished with death, but
rather that, to punish Ahaziah for his imitation of the
evil-doings of the house of Omri,<note place='foot'>xiii. 7<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> God allowed him to
visit Jehoram in order that he might share the fate of
the Israelite king.
</p>

<p>
The book of Kings had stated that Jehu slew forty-two
brethren of Ahaziah. It is, of course, perfectly
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
allowable to take <q>brethren</q> in the general sense of
<q>kinsmen</q>; but as the chronicler had recently mentioned
the massacre of all Ahaziah's brethren, he avoids even
the appearance of a contradiction by substituting <q>sons
of the brethren of Ahaziah</q> for brethren. This
alteration introduces new difficulties, but these difficulties
simply illustrate the general confusion of numbers and
ages which characterises the narrative at this point. In
connection with the burial of Ahaziah, it may be noted
that the popular recollection of Jehoshaphat endorsed the
favourable judgment contained in the <q>writing of
Elijah</q>: <q>They said</q> of Ahaziah, <q>He is the son of
Jehoshaphat, who sought Jehovah with all his heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
The chronicler next narrates Athaliah's murder of
the seed royal of Judah and her usurpation of the throne
of David, in terms almost identical with those of the
narrative in the book of Kings. But his previous
additions and modifications are hard to reconcile with
the account he here borrows from his ancient authority.
According to the chronicler, Jehoram had massacred all
the other sons of Jehoshaphat, and the Arabians had
slain all Jehoram's sons except Ahaziah, and Jehu had
slain their sons; so that Ahaziah was the only living
descendant in the male line of his grandfather Jehoshaphat;
he himself apparently died at the age of twenty-three.
It is intelligible enough that he should have a
son Joash and possibly other sons; but still it is
difficult to understand where Athaliah found <q>all the
seed royal</q> and <q>the king's sons</q> whom she put to
death. It is at any rate clear that Jehoram's slaughter
of his brethren met with an appropriate punishment:
all his own sons and grandsons were similarly slain,
except the child Joash.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's narrative of the revolution by which
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
Athaliah was slain, and the throne recovered for the
house of David in the person of Joash, follows substantially
the earlier history, the chief difference being,
as we have already noticed,<note place='foot'>Cf. p. 20.</note> that the chronicler substitutes
the Levitical guard of the second Temple for
the bodyguard of foreign mercenaries who were the
actual agents in this revolution.
</p>

<p>
A distinguished authority on European history is
fond of pointing to the evil effects of royal marriages as
one of the chief drawbacks to the monarchical system of
government. A crown may at any time devolve upon
a woman, and by her marriage with a powerful reigning
prince her country may virtually be subjected to a
foreign yoke. If it happens that the new sovereign
professes a different religion from that of his wife's
subjects, the evils arising from the marriage are seriously
aggravated. Some such fate befell the Netherlands as
the result of the marriage of Mary of Burgundy with the
Emperor Maximilian, and England was only saved
from the danger of transference to Catholic dominion by
the caution and patriotism of Queen Elizabeth.
</p>

<p>
Athaliah's usurpation was a bold attempt to reverse
the usual process and transfer the husband's dominions
to the authority and faith of the wife's family. It is
probable that Athaliah's permanent success would have
led to the absorption of Judah in the northern kingdom.
This last misfortune was averted by the energy and
courage of Jehoiada, but in the meantime the half-heathen
queen had succeeded in causing untold harm
and suffering to her adopted country. Our own history
furnishes numerous illustrations of the evil influences
that come in the train of foreign queens. Edward II.
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
suffered grievously at the hands of his French queen;
Henry VI.'s wife, Margaret of Anjou, contributed considerably
to the prolonged bitterness of the struggle
between York and Lancaster; and to Henry VIII.'s
marriage with Catherine of Aragon the country owed
the miseries and persecutions inflicted by Mary Tudor.
But, on the other hand, many of the foreign princesses
who have shared the English throne have won the
lasting gratitude of the nation. A French queen of
Kent, for instance, opened the way for Augustine's
mission to England.
</p>

<p>
But no foreign queen of England has had the opportunities
for mischief that were enjoyed and fully utilised
by Athaliah. She corrupted her husband and her
son, and she was probably at once the instigator of
their crimes and the instrument of their punishment.
By corrupting the rulers of Judah and by her own
misgovernment, she exercised an evil influence over the
nation; and as the people suffered, not for their sins
only, but also for those of their kings, Athaliah brought
misfortunes and calamity upon Judah. Unfortunately
such experiences are not confined to royal families; the
peace and honour, and prosperity of godly families in
all ranks of life have been disturbed and often destroyed
by the marriage of one of their members with a woman
of alien spirit and temperament. Here is a very
general and practical application of the chronicler's
objection to intercourse with the house of Omri.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Joash and Amaziah. 2 Chron. xxiv.-xxv.</head>

<p>
For Chronicles, as for the book of Kings, the main
interest of the reign of Joash is the repairing of
the Temple; but the later narrative introduces modifications
which give a somewhat different complexion to
the story. Both authorities tell us that Joash did that
which was right in the eyes of Jehovah all the days of
Jehoiada, but the book of Kings immediately adds that
<q>the high places were not taken away: the people
still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.</q><note place='foot'>Cf. xxv. 2 with 2 Kings xiv. 4, xxvi. 4 with 2 Kings xv. 4, xxvii. 2
with 2 Kings xv. 34, where similar statements are omitted by the
chronicler.</note>
Seeing that Jehoiada exercised the royal authority
during the minority of Joash, this toleration of the high
places must have had the sanction of the high-priest.
Now the chronicler and his contemporaries had been
educated in the belief that the Pentateuch was the
ecclesiastical code of the monarchy; they found it
impossible to credit a statement that the high-priest
had sanctioned any other sanctuary besides the temple
of Zion; accordingly they omitted the verse in
question.
</p>

<p>
In the earlier narrative of the repairing of the Temple
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
the priests are ordered by Joash to use certain sacred
dues and offerings to repair the breaches of the house;
but after some time had elapsed it was found that the
breaches had not been repaired: and when Joash
remonstrated with the priests, they flatly refused to
have anything to do with the repairs or with receiving
funds for the purpose. Their objections were, however,
overruled; and Jehoiada placed beside the altar a chest
with a hole in the lid, into which <q>the priests put
all the money that was brought into the house of
Jehovah.</q><note place='foot'>2 Kings xii. 9.</note> When it was sufficiently full, the king's
scribe and the high-priest counted the money, and put
it up in bags.
</p>

<p>
There were several points in this earlier narrative
which would have furnished very inconvenient precedents,
and were so much out of keeping with the
ideas and practices of the second Temple that, by the
time the chronicler wrote, a new and more intelligible
version of the story was current among the ministers
of the Temple. To begin with, there was an omission
which would have grated very unpleasantly on the
feelings of the chronicler. In this long narrative, wholly
taken up with the affairs of the Temple, nothing is said
about the Levites. The collecting and receiving of
money might well be supposed to belong to them; and
accordingly in Chronicles the Levites are first associated
with the priests in this matter, and then the priests
drop out of the narrative, and the Levites alone carry
out the financial arrangements.
</p>

<p>
Again, it might be understood from the book of Kings
that sacred dues and offerings, which formed the
revenue of the priests and Levites, were diverted by
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
the king's orders to the repair of the fabric. The
chronicler was naturally anxious that there should
be no mistake on this point; the ambiguous phrases
are omitted, and it is plainly indicated that funds
were raised for the repairs by means of a special tax
ordained by Moses. Joash <q>assembled the priests and
the Levites, and said to them, Go out into the cities of
Judah, and gather of all Israel money to repair the
house of your God from year to year, and see that ye
hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened it
not.</q> The remissness of the priests in the original
narrative is here very faithfully and candidly transferred
to the Levites. Then, as in the book of Kings, Joash
remonstrates with Jehoiada, but the terms of his
remonstrance are altogether different: here he complains
because the Levites have not been required <q>to bring
in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the tax appointed
by Moses the servant of Jehovah and by the congregation
of Israel for the tent of the testimony,</q><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the
Tabernacle, containing the Ark and the tables of the
Law. The reference apparently is to the law<note place='foot'>Exod. xxx. 11-16.</note> that
when a census was taken a poll-tax of a half-shekel a
head should be paid for the service of the Tabernacle.
As one of the main uses of a census was to facilitate
the raising of taxes, this law might not unfairly be
interpreted to mean that when occasion arose, or
perhaps even every year, a census should be taken in
order that this poll-tax might be levied. Nehemiah
arranged for a yearly poll-tax of a third of a shekel
for the incidental expenses of the Temple.<note place='foot'>Neh. x. 32.</note> Here,
however, the half-shekel prescribed in Exodus is
intended; and it should be observed that this poll-tax
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
was to be levied, not once only but <q>from year to
year.</q> The chronicler then inserts a note to explain
why these repairs were necessary: <q>The sons of
Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the
house of God; and also all the dedicated things of the
house of Jehovah they bestowed upon the Baals.</q>
Here we are confronted with a further difficulty. All
Jehoram's sons except Ahaziah were murdered by the
Arabs in their father's life-time. Who are these <q>sons
of Athaliah</q> who broke up the Temple? Jehoram
was about thirty-seven when his sons were massacred,
so that some of them may have been old enough to
break up the Temple. One would think that <q>the
dedicated things</q> might have been recovered for
Jehovah when Athaliah was overthrown; but possibly,
when the people retaliated by breaking into the house
of Baal, there were Achans among them, who appropriated
the plunder.
</p>

<p>
Having remonstrated with Jehoiada, the king took
matters into his own hands; and he, not Jehoiada, had
a chest made and placed, not beside the altar&mdash;such an
arrangement savoured of profanity&mdash;but without at
the gate of the Temple. This little touch is very
suggestive. The noise and bustle of paying over
money, receiving it, and putting it into the chest, would
have mingled distractingly with the solemn ritual of
sacrifice. In modern times the tinkle of threepenny
pieces often tends to mar the effect of an impressive
appeal and to disturb the quiet influences of a communion
service. The Scotch arrangement, by which
a plate covered with a fair white cloth is placed in the
porch of a church and guarded by two modern Levites
or elders, is much more in accordance with Chronicles.
</p>

<p>
Then, instead of sending out Levites to collect the
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
tax, proclamation was made that the people themselves
should bring their offerings. Obedience apparently
was made a matter of conscience, not of solicitation.
Perhaps it was because the Levites felt that sacred
dues should be given freely that they were not forward
to make yearly tax-collecting expeditions. At
any rate, the new method was signally successful.
Day after day the princes and people gladly brought
their offerings, and money was gathered in abundance.
Other passages suggest that the chronicler was not
always inclined to trust to the spontaneous generosity
of the people for the support of the priests and Levites;
but he plainly recognised that free-will offerings are
more excellent than the donations which are painfully
extracted by the yearly visits of official collectors. He
would probably have sympathised with the abolition
of pew-rents.
</p>

<p>
As in the book of Kings, the chest was emptied at
suitable intervals; but instead of the high-priest being
associated with the king's scribe, as if they were on
a level and both of them officials of the royal court, the
chief priest's <emph>officer</emph> assists the king's <emph>scribe</emph>, so that the
chief priest is placed on a level with the king himself.
</p>

<p>
The details of the repairs in the two narratives differ
considerably in form, but for the most part agree in
substance; the only striking point is that they are
apparently at variance as to whether vessels of silver
or gold were or were not made for the renovated
Temple.
</p>

<p>
Then follows the account<note place='foot'>xxiv. 14-22, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> of the ingratitude and
apostacy of Joash and his people. As long as Jehoiada
lived, the services of the Temple were regularly performed,
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
and Judah remained faithful to its God; but
at last he died, full of days: a hundred and thirty years
old. In his life-time he had exercised royal authority,
and when he died he was buried like a king: <q>They
buried him in the city of David among the kings,
because he had done good in Israel and toward God
and His house.</q><note place='foot'>Curiously enough, Jehoiada's name does not occur in the list of
high-priests in 1 Chron. vi. 1-12.</note> Like Nero when he shook off the
control of Seneca and Burrhus, Joash changed his
policy as soon as Jehoiada was dead. Apparently he
was a weak character, always following some one's
leading. His freedom from the influence that had
made his early reign decent and honourable was not,
as in Nero's case, his own act. The change of policy
was adopted at the suggestion of the princes of Judah.
Kings, princes, and people fell back into the old wickedness;
they forsook the Temple and served idols. Yet
Jehovah did not readily give them up to their own
folly, nor hastily inflict punishment; He sent, not one
prophet, but many, to bring them back to Himself, but
they would not hearken. At last Jehovah made one
last effort to win Joash back; this time He chose for
His messenger a priest who had special personal claims
on the favourable attention of the king. The prophet
was Zechariah the son of Jehoiada, to whom Joash
owed his life and his throne. The name was a favourite
one in Israel, and was borne by two other prophets
besides the son of Jehoiada. Its very etymology constituted
an appeal to the conscience of Joash: it is
compounded of the sacred name and a root meaning
<q>to remember</q>. The Jews were adepts at extracting
from such a combination all its possible applications.
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
The most obvious was that Jehovah would remember
the sin of Judah, but the recent prophets sent to recall
the sinners to their God showed that Jehovah also
remembered their former righteousness and desired to
recall it to them and them to it; they should remember
Jehovah. Moreover, Joash should remember the
teaching of Jehoiada and his obligations to the father
of the man now addressing him. Probably Joash did
remember all this when, in the striking Hebrew idiom,
<q>the spirit of God clothed itself with Zechariah the
son of Jehoiada the priest, and he stood above the
people and said unto them, Thus saith God: Why
transgress ye the commandments of Jehovah, to your
hurt? Because ye have forsaken Jehovah, He hath
also forsaken you.</q> This is the burden of the prophetic
utterances in Chronicles<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxviii. 9; 2 Chron. vii. 19, xii. 5, xiii. 10, xv. 2, xxi. 10,
xxviii. 6, xxix. 6, xxxiv. 25.</note>; the converse is stated
by Irenæus when he says that to follow the Saviour
is to partake of salvation. Though the truth of
this teaching had been enforced again and again by
the misfortunes that had befallen Judah under apostate
kings, Joash paid no heed to it, nor did he remember
the kindness which Jehoiada had done him; that is to
say, he showed no gratitude towards the house of
Jehoiada. Perhaps an uncomfortable sense of obligation
to the father only embittered him the more against
his son. But the son of the high-priest could not be
dealt with as summarily as Asa dealt with Hanani
when he put him in prison. The king might have
been indifferent to the wrath of Jehovah, but the son
of the man who had for years ruled Judah and
Jerusalem must have had a strong party at his back.
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
Accordingly the king and his adherents conspired against
Zechariah, and they stoned him with stones by the king's
command. This Old Testament martyr died in a very
different spirit from that of Stephen; his prayer was,
not, <q>Lord, lay not this sin to their charge,</q> but
<q>Jehovah, look upon it and require it.</q> His prayer
did not long remain unanswered. Within a year the
Syrians<note place='foot'>Cf. 2 Kings xii. 17, 18, of which this narrative is probably an
adaptation.</note> came against Joash; he had a very great host,
but he was powerless against a small company of
the Divinely commissioned avengers of Zechariah.
The tempters who had seduced the king into apostacy
were a special mark for the wrath of Jehovah: the
Syrians destroyed all the princes, and sent their spoil
to the king of Damascus. Like Asa and Jehoram,
Joash suffered personal punishment in the shape of
<q>great diseases,</q> but his end was even more tragic
than theirs. One conspiracy avenged another: in his
own household there were adherents of the family of
Jehoiada: <q>Two of his own servants conspired against
him for the blood of Zechariah, and slew him on his
bed; and they buried him in the city of David, and not
in the sepulchres of the kings.</q>
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's biography of Joash might have been
specially designed to remind his readers that the most
careful education must sometimes fail of its purpose.
Joash had been trained from his earliest years in the
Temple itself, under the care of Jehoiada and of his aunt
Jehoshabeath, the high-priest's wife. He had no
doubt been carefully instructed in the religion and
sacred history of Israel, and had been continually surrounded
by the best religious influences of his age. For
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
Judah, in the chronicler's estimation, was even then
the one home of the true faith. These holy influences
had been continued after Joash had attained to manhood,
and Jehoiada was careful to provide that the young
king's harem should be enlisted in the cause of piety
and good government. We may be sure that the two
wives whom Jehoiada selected for his pupil were
consistent worshippers of Jehovah and loyal to the Law
and the Temple. No daughter of the house of Ahab,
no <q>strange wife</q> from Egypt, Ammon, or Moab,
would be allowed the opportunity of undoing the good
effects of early training. Moreover, we might have
expected the character developed by education to be
strengthened by exercise. The early years of his
reign were occupied by zealous activity in the service
of the Temple. The pupil outstripped his master, and
the enthusiasm of the youthful king found occasion to
rebuke the tardy zeal of the venerable high-priest.
</p>

<p>
And yet all this fair promise was blighted in a day.
The piety carefully fostered for half a life-time gave
way before the first assaults of temptation, and never
even attempted to reassert itself. Possibly the brief
and fragmentary records from which the chronicler had
to make his selection unduly emphasise the contrast
between the earlier and later years of the reign of
Joash; but the picture he draws of the failure of
best of tutors and governors is unfortunately only too
typical. Julian the Apostate was educated by a
distinguished Christian prelate, Eusebius of Nicomedia,
and was trained in a strict routine of religious
observances; yet he repudiated Christianity at the
earliest safe opportunity. His apostacy, like that of
Joash, was probably characterised by base ingratitude.
At Constantine's death the troops in Constantinople
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
massacred nearly all the princes of the imperial family,
and Julian, then only six years old, is said to have been
saved and concealed in a church by Mark, Bishop of
Arethusa. When Julian became emperor, he repaid this
obligation by subjecting his benefactor to cruel tortures
because he had destroyed a heathen temple and refused
to make any compensation. Imagine Joash requiring
Jehoiada to make compensation for pulling down a high
place!
</p>

<p>
The parallel of Julian may suggest a partial explanation
of the fall of Joash. The tutelage of Jehoiada
may have been too strict, monotonous, and prolonged;
in choosing wives for the young king, the aged priest
may not have made an altogether happy selection;
Jehoiada may have kept Joash under control until he
was incapable of independence and could only pass from
one dominant influence to another. When the high-priest's
death gave the king an opportunity of changing
his masters, a reaction from the too urgent insistence
upon his duty to the Temple may have inclined Joash
to listen favourably to the solicitations of the princes.
</p>

<p>
But perhaps the sins of Joash are sufficiently
accounted for by his ancestry. His mother was Zibiah of
Beersheba, and therefore probably a Jewess. Of her
we know nothing further good or bad. Otherwise his
ancestors for two generations had been uniformly bad.
His father and grandfather were the wicked kings
Jehoram and Ahaziah; his grandmother was Athaliah;
and he was descended from Ahab, and possibly from
Jezebel. When we recollect that his mother Zibiah
was a wife of Ahaziah and had probably been selected
by Athaliah, we cannot suppose that the element she
contributed to his character would do much to counteract
the evil he inherited from his father.
</p>

<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>

<p>
The chronicler's account of his successor Amaziah is
equally disappointing; he also began well and ended
miserably. In the opening formulæ of the history of
the new reign and in the account of the punishment of
the assassins of Joash, the chronicler closely follows the
earlier narrative, omitting, as usual, the statement that
this good king did not take away the high places.
Like his pious predecessors, Amaziah in his earlier and
better years was rewarded with a great army<note place='foot'>xxv. 5-13, peculiar to Chronicles, except that the account of the
war with Edom is expanded from the brief note in Kings. Cf. ver.
11<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> with 2 Kings xiv. 7.</note> and
military success; and yet the muster-roll of his forces
shows how the sins and calamities of the recent wicked
reigns had told on the resources of Judah. Jehoshaphat
could command more than eleven hundred and sixty
thousand soldiers; Amaziah has only three hundred
thousand.
</p>

<p>
These were not sufficient for the king's ambition; by
the Divine grace, he had already amassed wealth, in
spite of the Syrian ravages at the close of the preceding
reign: and he laid out a hundred talents of silver in
purchasing the services of as many thousand Israelites,
thus falling into the sin for which Jehoshaphat had
twice been reproved and punished. Jehovah, however,
arrested Amaziah's employment of unholy allies at the
outset. A man of God came to him and exhorted him
not to let the army of Israel go with him, because
<q>Jehovah is not with Israel</q>; if he had courage and
faith to go with only his three hundred thousand Jews,
all would be well, otherwise God would cast him down,
as He had done Ahaziah. The statement that Jehovah
was not with Israel might have been understood in a
sense that would seem almost blasphemous to the
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
chronicler's contemporaries; he is careful therefore
to explain that here <q>Israel</q> simply means <q>the
children of Ephraim.</q>
</p>

<p>
Amaziah obeyed the prophet, but was naturally
distressed at the thought that he had spent a hundred
talents for nothing: <q>What shall we do for the
hundred talents which I have given to the army of
Israel?</q> He did not realise that the Divine alliance
would be worth more to him than many hundred
talents of silver; or perhaps he reflected that Divine
grace is free, and that he might have saved his money.
One would like to believe that he was anxious to
recover this silver in order to devote it to the service
of the sanctuary; but he was evidently one of those
sordid souls who like, as the phrase goes, <q>to get their
religion for nothing.</q> No wonder Amaziah went
astray! We can scarcely be wrong in detecting a vein
of contempt in the prophet's answer: <q>Jehovah can
give thee much more than this.</q>
</p>

<p>
This little episode carries with it a great principle.
Every crusade against an established abuse is met
with the cry, <q>What shall we do for the hundred
talents?</q>&mdash;for the capital invested in slaves or in
gin-shops; for English revenues from alcohol or Indian
revenues from opium? Few have faith to believe that
the Lord can provide for financial deficits, or, if we
may venture to indicate the method in which the Lord
provides, that a nation will ever be able to pay its way by
honest finance. Let us note, however, that Amaziah was
asked to sacrifice his own talents, and not other people's.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly Amaziah sent the mercenaries home; and
they returned in great dudgeon, offended by the slight
put upon them and disappointed at the loss of
prospective plunder. The king's sin in hiring Israelite
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
mercenaries was to suffer a severer punishment than
the loss of money. While he was away at war, his
rejected allies returned, and attacked the border cities,<note place='foot'>In the phrase <q>from Samaria to Beth-horon,</q> <q>Samaria</q>
apparently means the northern kingdom, and not the city, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, from
the borders of Samaria; the chronicler has fallen into the nomenclature
of his own age.</note>
killed three thousand Jews, and took much plunder.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Amaziah and his army were reaping
direct fruits of their obedience in Edom, where they
gained a great victory, and followed it up by a massacre
of ten thousand captives, whom they killed by throwing
down from the top of a precipice. Yet, after
all, Amaziah's victory over Edom was of small profit
to him, for he was thereby seduced into idolatry.
Amongst his other prisoners, he had brought away the
gods of Edom; and instead of throwing them over a
precipice, as a pious king should have done, <q>he set
them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself
before them, and burned incense unto them.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then Jehovah, in His anger, sent a prophet to
demand, <q>Why hast thou sought after foreign gods,
which have not delivered their own people out of thine
hand?</q> According to current ideas outside of Israel,
a nation might very reasonably seek after the gods of
their conquerors. Such conquest could only be attributed
to the superior power and grace of the gods of
the victors: the gods of the defeated were vanquished
along with their worshippers, and were obviously
incompetent and unworthy of further confidence. But
to act like Amaziah&mdash;to go out to battle in the name of
Jehovah, directed and encouraged by His prophet, to
conquer by the grace of the God of Israel, and then to
desert Jehovah of hosts, the Giver of victory, for
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
the paltry and discredited idols of the conquered
Edomites&mdash;this was sheer madness. And yet as
Greece enslaved her Roman conquerors, so the victor
has often been won to the faith of the vanquished. The
Church subdued the barbarians who had overwhelmed
the empire, and the heathen Saxons adopted at last
the religion of the conquered Britons. Henry IV. of
France is scarcely a parallel to Amaziah: he went to
mass that he might hold his sceptre with a firmer
grasp, while the king of Judah merely adopted foreign
idols in order to gratify his superstition and love of
novelty.
</p>

<p>
Apparently Amaziah was at first inclined to discuss
the question: he and the prophet talked together; but
the king soon became irritated, and broke off the
interview with abrupt discourtesy: <q>Have we made
thee of the king's counsel? Forbear; why shouldest
thou be smitten?</q> Prosperity seems to have been
invariably fatal to the Jewish kings who began to reign
well; the success that rewarded, at the same time
destroyed their virtue. Before his victory Amaziah
had been courteous and submissive to the messenger of
Jehovah; now he defied Him and treated His prophet
roughly. The latter disappeared, but not before he
had declared the Divine condemnation of the stubborn
king.
</p>

<p>
The rest of the history of Amaziah&mdash;his presumptuous
war with Joash, king of Israel, his defeat and degradation,
and his assassination&mdash;is taken verbatim from the book
of Kings, with a few modifications and editorial notes
by the chronicler to harmonise these sections with the
rest of his narrative. For instance, in the book of
Kings the account of the war with Joash begins
somewhat abruptly: Amaziah sends his defiance before
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
any reason has been given for his action. The
chronicler inserts a phrase which connects his new
paragraph very suggestively with the one that goes
before. The former concluded with the king's taunt
that the prophet was not of his counsel, to which the
prophet replied that the king should be destroyed
because he had not hearkened to the Divine counsel
proffered to him. Then Amaziah <q>took advice</q>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, he
consulted those who were of his counsel, and the sequel
showed their incompetence. The chronicler also explains
that Amaziah's rash persistence in his challenge to
Joash <q>was of God, that He might deliver them into
the hand of their enemies, because they had sought
after the gods of Edom.</q> He also tells us that the
name of the custodian of the sacred vessels of the
Temple was Obed-edom. As the chronicler mentions
five Levites of the name of Obed-edom, four of whom
occur nowhere else, the name was probably common
in some family still surviving in his own time. But,
in view of the fondness of the Jews for significant
etymology, it is probable that the name is recorded here
because it was exceedingly appropriate. <q>The servant
of Edom</q> suits the official who has to surrender his
sacred charge to a conqueror because his own king had
worshipped the gods of Edom. Lastly, an additional
note explains that Amaziah's apostacy had promptly
deprived him of the confidence and loyalty of his subjects;
the conspiracy which led to his assassination
was formed from the time that he turned away from
following Jehovah, so that when he sent his proud
challenge to Joash his authority was already undermined,
and there were traitors in the army which he
led against Israel. We are shown one of the means
used by Jehovah to bring about his defeat.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Uzziah, Jotham, and Ahaz.<note place='foot'>For the discussion of the chronicler's account of Ahaz see Book
III., Chap. VII.</note> 2 Chron. xxvi.-xxviii.</head>

<p>
After the assassination of Amaziah, all the people
of Judah took his son Uzziah, a lad of sixteen,
called in the book of Kings Azariah, and made him
king. The chronicler borrows from the older narrative
the statement that <q>Uzziah did that which was right
in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his father
Amaziah had done.</q> In the light of the sins attributed
both to Amaziah and Uzziah in Chronicles, this is a
somewhat doubtful compliment. Sarcasm, however,
is not one of the chronicler's failings; he simply allows
the older history to speak for itself, and leaves the
reader to combine its judgment with the statement of
later tradition as best he can. But yet we might
modify this verse, and read that Uzziah did good and
evil, prospered and fell into misfortune, according to all
that his father Amaziah had done, or an even closer
parallel might be drawn between what Uzziah did and
suffered and the chequered character and fortunes of
Joash.
</p>

<p>
Though much older than the latter, at his accession
Uzziah was young enough to be very much under
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
the control of ministers and advisers; and as Joash
was trained in loyalty to Jehovah by the high-priest
Jehoiada, so Uzziah <q>set himself to seek God during
the life-time</q> of a certain prophet, who, like the son of
Jehoiada, was named Zechariah, <q>who had understanding
or gave instruction in the fear of Jehovah,</q><note place='foot'>So R.V. marg., with LXX., Targum, Syriac and Arabic versions,
Talmud, Rashi, Kimchi, and some Hebrew manuscripts (Bertheau, i.
1). A.R.V., <q>had understanding in the visions</q> (R.V. vision) <q>of
God.</q> The difference between the two Hebrew readings is very
slight. Vv. 5-20, with the exception of the bare fact of the leprosy
are peculiar to Chronicles.</note> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
a man versed in sacred learning, rich in spiritual
experience, and able to communicate his knowledge,
such a one as Ezra the scribe in later days.
</p>

<p>
Under the guidance of this otherwise unknown
prophet, the young king was led to conform his private
life and public administration to the will of God. In
<q>seeking God,</q> Uzziah would be careful to maintain
and attend the Temple services, to honour the priests
of Jehovah and make due provision for their wants;
and <q>as long as he sought Jehovah God gave him
prosperity.</q>
</p>

<p>
Uzziah received all the rewards usually bestowed
upon pious kings: he was victorious in war, and exacted
tribute from neighbouring states; he built fortresses,
and had abundance of cattle and slaves, a large and
well-equipped army, and well-supplied arsenals. Like
other powerful kings of Judah, he asserted his supremacy
over the tribes along the southern frontier of
his kingdom. God helped him against the Philistines,
the Arabians of Gur-baal, and the Meunim. He
destroyed the fortifications of Gath, Jabne, and Ashdod,
and built forts of his own in the country of the
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
Philistines. Nothing is known about Gur-baal; but
the Arabian allies of the Philistines would be, like
Jehoram's enemies <q>the Arabians who dwelt near the
Ethiopians,</q> nomads of the deserts south of Judah.
These Philistines and Arabians had brought tribute
to Jehoshaphat without waiting to be subdued by his
armies; so now the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah, and
his name spread abroad <q>even to the entering in of
Egypt,</q> possibly a hundred or even a hundred and
fifty miles from Jerusalem. It is evident that the
chronicler's ideas of international politics were of very
modest dimensions.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, Uzziah added to the fortifications of
Jerusalem; and because he loved husbandry and had
cattle, and husbandmen, and vine-dressers in the open
country and outlying districts of Judah, he built towers
for their protection. His army was of about the same
strength as that of Amaziah, three hundred thousand
men, so that in this, as in his character and exploits, he
did according to all that his father had done, except
that he was content with his own Jewish warriors and
did not waste his talents in purchasing worse than
useless reinforcements from Israel. Uzziah's army
was well disciplined, carefully organised, and constantly
employed; they were men of mighty power, and went
out to war by bands, to collect the king's tribute and
enlarge his dominions and revenue by new conquests.
The war material in his arsenals is described at greater
length than that of any previous king: shields, spears,
helmets, coats of mail, bows and stones for slings.
The great advance of military science in Uzziah's reign
was marked by the invention of engines of war for the
defence of Jerusalem; some, like the Roman <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>catapulta</foreign>,
were for arrows, and others, like the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ballista</foreign>, to hurl
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
huge stones. Though the Assyrian sculptures show
us that battering-rams were freely employed by them
against the walls of Jewish cities,<note place='foot'>Cf. Ezek. xxvi. 9.</note> and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ballista</foreign> is
said by Pliny to have been invented in Syria,<note place='foot'>Pliny, vii. 56 <hi rend='italic'>apud</hi> Smith's <hi rend='italic'>Bible Dictionary</hi>.</note> no other
Hebrew king is credited with the possession of this
primitive artillery. The chronicler or his authority
seems profoundly impressed by the great skill displayed
in this invention; in describing it, he uses the root
ḥāshabh, to devise, three times in three consecutive
words. The engines were <q><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ḥishshebhōnôth maḥăshebheth
ḥôshēbh</foreign></q>&mdash;<q>engines engineered by the ingenious.</q>
Jehovah not only provided Uzziah with ample military
resources of every kind, but also blessed the means
which He Himself had furnished; Uzziah <q>was
marvellously helped, till he was strong, and his name
spread far abroad.</q> The neighbouring states heard
with admiration of his military resources.
</p>

<p>
The student of Chronicles will by this time be prepared
for the invariable sequel to God-given prosperity.
Like David, Rehoboam, Asa, and Amaziah, when
Uzziah <q>was strong, his heart was lifted up to his
destruction.</q> The most powerful of the kings of Judah
died a leper. An attack of leprosy admitted of only
one explanation: it was a plague inflicted by Jehovah
Himself as the punishment of sin; and so the book of
Kings tells us that <q>Jehovah smote the king,</q> but says
nothing about the sin thus punished. The chronicler
was able to supply the omission: Uzziah had dared
to go into the Temple and with irregular zeal to
burn incense on the altar of incense. In so doing, he
was violating the Law, which made the priestly office
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>
and all priestly functions the exclusive prerogative of
the house of Aaron and denounced the penalty of
death against any one who usurped priestly functions.<note place='foot'>Num. xviii. 7; Exod. xxx. 7.</note>
But Uzziah was not allowed to carry out his unholy
design; the high-priest Azariah went in after him with
eighty stalwart colleagues, rebuked his presumption,
and bade him leave the sanctuary. Uzziah was no
more tractable to the admonitions of the priest than
Asa and Amaziah had been to those of the prophets.
The kings of Judah were accustomed, even in
Chronicles, to exercise an unchallenged control over
the Temple and to regard the high-priests very much
in the light of private chaplains. Uzziah was wroth;
he was at the zenith of his power and glory; his heart
was lifted up. Who were these priests, that they should
stand between him and Jehovah and dare to publicly
check and rebuke him in his own temple? Henry II.'s
feelings towards Becket must have been mild compared
to those of Uzziah towards Azariah, who, if the king
could have had his way, would doubtless have shared
the fate of Zechariah the son of Jehoiada. But a
direct intervention of Jehovah protected the priests,
and preserved Uzziah from further sacrilege. While his
features were convulsed with anger, leprosy brake forth
in his forehead. The contest between king and priest
was at once ended; the priests thrust him out, and he
himself hasted to go, recognising that Jehovah had
smitten him. Henceforth he lived apart, cut off from
fellowship alike with man and God, and his son Jotham
governed in his stead. The book of Kings simply
makes the general statement that Uzziah was buried
with his fathers in the city of David; but the
<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>
chronicler is anxious that his readers should not
suppose that the tombs of the sacred house of David
were polluted by the presence of a leprous corpse: he
explains that the leper was buried, not in the royal
sepulchre, but in the field attached to it.
</p>

<p>
The moral of this incident is obvious. In attempting
to understand its significance, we need not trouble
ourselves about the relative authority of kings and
priests; the principle vindicated by the punishment of
Uzziah was the simple duty of obedience to an express
command of Jehovah. However trivial the burning
of incense may be in itself, it formed part of an
elaborate and complicated system of ritual. To interfere
with the Divine ordinances in one detail would mar
the significance and impressiveness of the whole Temple
service. One arbitrary innovation would be a precedent
for others, and would constitute a serious danger for a
system whose value lay in continuous uniformity.
Moreover, Uzziah was stubborn in disobedience. His
attempt to burn incense might have been sufficiently
punished by the public and humiliating reproof of the
high-priest. His leprosy came upon him because
when thwarted in an unholy purpose he gave way to
ungoverned passion.
</p>

<p>
In its consequences we see a practical application
of the lessons of the incident. How often is the
sinner only provoked to greater wickedness by the
obstacles which Divine grace opposes to his wrongdoing!
How few men will tolerate the suggestion that
their intentions are cruel, selfish, or dishonourable!
Remonstrance is an insult, an offence against their
personal dignity; they feel that their self-respect
demands that they should persevere in their purpose,
and that they should resent and punish any one who
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>
has tried to thwart them. Uzziah's wrath was perfectly
natural; few men have been so uniformly patient of
reproof as not sometimes to have turned in anger
upon those who warned them against sin. The most
dramatic feature of this episode, the sudden frost
of leprosy in the king's forehead, is not without
its spiritual antitype. Men's anger at well-merited
reproof has often blighted their lives once for all with
ineradicable moral leprosy. In the madness of passion
they have broken bonds which have hitherto restrained
them and committed themselves beyond recall to evil
pursuits and fatal friendships. Let us take the most
lenient view of Uzziah's conduct, and suppose that he
believed himself entitled to offer incense; he could not
doubt that the priests were equally confident that
Jehovah had enjoined the duty on them, and them
alone. Such a question was not to be decided by
violence, in the heat of personal bitterness. Azariah
himself had been unwisely zealous in bringing in his
eighty priests; Jehovah showed him that they were
quite unnecessary, because at the last Uzziah <q>himself
hasted to go out.</q> When personal passion and
jealousy are eliminated from Christian polemics, the
Church will be able to write the epitaph of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>odium
theologicum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Uzziah was succeeded by Jotham, who had already
governed for some time as regent. In recording the
favourable judgment of the book of Kings, <q>He did that
which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to
all that his father Uzziah had done,</q> the chronicler is
careful to add, <q>Howbeit he entered not into the temple
of Jehovah</q>; the exclusive privilege of the house of
Aaron had been established once for all. The story
of Jotham's reign comes like a quiet and pleasant oasis
<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>
in the chronicler's dreary narrative of wicked rulers,
interspersed with pious kings whose piety failed them
in their latter days. Jotham shares with Solomon
the distinguished honour of being a king of whom
no evil is recorded either in Kings or Chronicles,
and who died in prosperity, at peace with Jehovah.
At the same time it is probable that Jotham owes the
blameless character he bears in Chronicles to the
fact that the earlier narrative does not mention any
misfortunes of his, especially any misfortune towards
the close of his life. Otherwise the theological school
from whom the chronicler derived his later traditions
would have been anxious to discover or deduce
some sin to account for such misfortune. At the end
of the short notice of his reign, between two parts of
the usual closing formula, an editor of the book of
Kings has inserted the statement that <q>in those days
Jehovah began to send against Judah Rezin the king
of Syria and Pekah the son of Remaliah.</q> This verse
the chronicler has omitted; neither the date<note place='foot'>Kimchi interprets <q>those days</q> as meaning <q>after the death of
Jotham.</q></note> nor the
nature of this trouble was clear enough to cast any
slur upon the character of Jotham.
</p>

<p>
Jotham, again, had the rewards of a pious king:
he added a gate to the Temple, and strengthened the
wall of Ophel<note place='foot'>The reference to the wall of Ophel is peculiar to Chronicles:
indeed, Ophel is only mentioned in Chronicles and Nehemiah; it was
the southern spur of Mount Moriah (Neh. iii. 26, 27). Vv. 3<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>-7
are also peculiar to Chronicles.</note>, and built cities and castles in Judah;
he made successful war upon Ammon, and received
from them an immense tribute&mdash;a hundred talents of
silver, ten thousand measures of wheat, and as much
barley&mdash;for three successive years. What happened
<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>
afterwards we are not told. It has been suggested
that the amounts mentioned were paid in three yearly
instalments, or that the three years were at the end
of the reign, and the tribute came to an end when
Jotham died or when the troubles with Pekah and
Rezin began.
</p>

<p>
We have had repeated occasion to notice that in his
accounts of the good kings the chronicler almost
always omits the qualifying clause to the effect that
they did not take away the high places. He does so
here; but, contrary to his usual practice, he inserts a
qualifying clause of his own: <q>The people did yet
corruptly.</q> He probably had in view the unmitigated
wickedness of the following reign, and was glad to
retain the evidence that Ahaz found encouragement
and support in his idolatry; he is careful, however, to
state the fact so that no shadow of blame falls upon
Jotham.
</p>

<p>
The life of Ahaz has been dealt with elsewhere.
Here we need merely repeat that for the sixteen years
of his reign Judah was to all appearance utterly given
over to every form of idolatry, and was oppressed and
brought low by Israel, Syria, and Assyria.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. Hezekiah: The Religious Value Of Music.
2 Chron. xxix.-xxxii.</head>

<p>
The bent of the chroniclers mind is well illustrated
by the proportion of space assigned to
ritual by him and by the book of Kings respectively.
In the latter a few lines only are devoted to ritual, and
the bulk of the space is given to the invasion of
Sennacherib, the embassy from Babylon, etc., while
in Chronicles ritual occupies about three times as
many verses as personal and public affairs.
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah, though not blameless, was all but perfect
in his loyalty to Jehovah. The chronicler reproduces
the customary formula for a good king: <q>He did that
which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to
all that David his father had done</q>; but his cautious
judgment rejects the somewhat rhetorical statement
in Kings that <q>after him was none like him among all
the kings of Judah, nor any that were before him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah's policy was made clear immediately after
his accession. His zeal for reformation could tolerate
no delay; the first month<note place='foot'>This is usually understood as Nisan, the first month of the ecclesiastical
year.</note> of the first year of his reign
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
saw him actively engaged in the good work.<note place='foot'>xxix. 3-xxxi. 21 (the cleansing of the Temple and accompanying
feast, Passover, organisation of the priests and Levites) are substantially
peculiar to Chronicles, though in a sense they expand 2 Kings
xviii. 4-7, because they fulfil the commandments which Jehovah
commanded Moses.</note> It was
no light task that lay before him. Not only were
there altars in every corner of Jerusalem and idolatrous
high places in every city of Judah, but the Temple
services had ceased, the lamps were put out, the sacred
vessels cut in pieces, the Temple had been polluted
and then closed, and the priests and Levites were
scattered. Sixteen years of licensed idolatry must
have fostered all that was vile in the country, have put
wicked men in authority, and created numerous vested
interests connected by close ties with idolatry, notably
the priests of all the altars and high places. On the
other hand, the reign of Ahaz had been an unbroken
series of disasters; the people had repeatedly endured
the horrors of invasion. His government as time went
on must have become more and more unpopular, for
when he died he was not buried in the sepulchres of
the kings. As idolatry was a prominent feature of his
policy, there would be a reaction in favour of the
worship of Jehovah, and there would not be wanting
true believers to tell the people that their sufferings
were a consequence of idolatry. To a large party in
Judah Hezekiah's reversal of his father's religious
policy would be as welcome as Elizabeth's declaration
against Rome was to most Englishmen.
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah began by opening and repairing the doors
of the Temple. Its closed doors had been a symbol
of the national repudiation of Jehovah; to reopen them
<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
was necessarily the first step in the reconciliation of
Judah to its God, but only the first step. The doors
were open as a sign that Jehovah was invited to return
to His people and again to manifest His presence in the
Holy of holies, so that through those open doors Israel
might have access to Him by means of the priests.
But the Temple was as yet no fit place for the presence
of Jehovah. With its lamps extinguished, its sacred
vessels destroyed, its floors and walls thick with dust
and full of all filthiness, it was rather a symbol of the
apostacy of Judah. Accordingly Hezekiah sought
the help of the Levites. It is true that he is first said
to have collected together priests and Levites, but
from that point onward the priests are almost entirely
ignored.
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah reminded the Levites of the misdoings of
Ahaz and his adherents and the wrath which they had
brought upon Judah and Jerusalem; he told them it
was his purpose to conciliate Jehovah by making a
covenant with Him; he appealed to them as the chosen
ministers of Jehovah and His temple to co-operate
heartily in this good work.
</p>

<p>
The Levites responded to his appeal apparently
rather in acts than words. No spokesman replies to
the king's speech, but with prompt obedience they set
about their work forthwith; they arose, Kohathites,
sons of Merari, Gershonites, sons of Elizaphan, Asaph,
Heman, and Jeduthun&mdash;the chronicler has a Homeric
fondness for catalogues of high-sounding names&mdash;the
leaders of all these divisions are duly mentioned.
Kohath, Gershon, and Merari are well known as the
three great clans of the house of Levi; and here we find
the three guilds of singers&mdash;Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun&mdash;placed
on a level with the older clans. Elizaphan
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>
was apparently a division of the clan Kohath,<note place='foot'>Exod. vi. 18, 22; Num. iii. 30, mention Elizaphan as a descendant
of Kohath.</note> which,
like the guilds of singers, had obtained an independent
status. The result is to recognise seven divisions of
the tribe.
</p>

<p>
The chiefs of the Levites gathered their brethren
together, and having performed the necessary rites of
ceremonial cleansing for themselves, went in to cleanse
the Temple; that is to say, the priests went into the
holy place and the Holy of holies and brought out
<q>all the uncleanness</q> into the court, and the Levites
carried it away to the brook Kidron: but before the
building itself could be reached eight days were spent
in cleansing the courts, and then the priests went into
the Temple itself and spent eight days in cleansing it,
in the manner described above. Then they reported
to the king that the cleansing was finished, and especially
that <q>all the vessels which King Ahaz cast
away</q> had been recovered and reconsecrated with due
ceremony. We were told in the previous chapter that
Ahaz had cut to pieces the vessels of the Temple, but
these may have been other vessels.
</p>

<p>
Then Hezekiah celebrated a great dedication feast;
seven bullocks, seven rams, seven lambs, and seven he-goats
were offered as a sin-offering for the dynasty,<note place='foot'>So Strack-Zockler, i. 1.</note> for
the Temple, for Judah, and (by special command of the
king) for all Israel, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> for the northern tribes as well
as for Judah and Benjamin. Apparently this sin-offering
was made in silence, but afterwards the king
set the Levites and priests in their places with their
musical instruments, and when the burnt offering began
<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>
<q>the song of Jehovah began with the trumpets together
with the instruments of David king of Israel. And all
the congregation worshipped, and the singers sang, and
the trumpeters sounded,</q> and all this continued till the
burnt offering was finished.
</p>

<p>
When the people had been formally reconciled to
Jehovah by this representative national sacrifice, and
thus purified from the uncleanness of idolatry and
consecrated afresh to their God, they were permitted
and invited to make individual sacrifices, thank-offerings
and burnt offerings. Each man might enjoy for himself
the renewed privilege of access to Jehovah, and
obtain the assurance of pardon for his sins, and offer
thanksgiving for his own special blessings. And they
brought offerings in abundance: seventy bullocks, a
hundred rams, and two hundred lambs for a burnt
offering; and six hundred oxen and three thousand
sheep for thank-offerings. Thus were the Temple
services restored and reinaugurated; and Hezekiah
and the people rejoiced because they felt that this
unpremeditated outburst of enthusiasm was due to
the gracious influence of the Spirit of Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's narrative is somewhat marred by a
touch of professional jealousy. According to the
ordinary ritual,<note place='foot'>Lev. i. 6.</note> the offerer flayed the burnt offerings; but
for some special reason, perhaps because of the exceptional
solemnity of the occasion, this duty now devolved
upon the priests. But the burnt offerings were abundant
beyond all precedent; the priests were too few for
the work, and the Levites were called in to help them,
<q>for the Levites were more upright in heart to purify
themselves than the priests.</q> Apparently even in the
<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>
second Temple brethren did not always dwell together
in unity.
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah had now provided for the regular services
of the Temple, and had given the inhabitants of Jerusalem
a full opportunity of returning to Jehovah; but the
people of the provinces were chiefly acquainted with
the Temple through the great annual festivals. These,
too, had long been in abeyance; and special steps had to
be taken to secure their future observance. In order
to do this, it was necessary to recall the provincials to
their allegiance to Jehovah. Under ordinary circumstances
the great festival of the Passover would have
been observed in the first month, but at the time
appointed for the paschal feast the Temple was still
unclean, and the priests and Levites were occupied in its
purification. But Hezekiah could not endure that the
first year of his reign should be marked by the omission
of this great feast. He took counsel with the princes
and public assembly&mdash;nothing is said about the priests&mdash;and
they decided to hold the Passover in the second
month instead of the first. We gather from casual
allusions in vv. 6-8 that the kingdom of Samaria had
already come to an end; the people had been carried into
captivity, and only a remnant were left in the land.<note place='foot'>According to 2 Kings xviii. 10, Samaria was not taken till the
sixth year of Hezekiah's reign. It is not necessary for an expositor of
Chronicles to attempt to harmonise the two accounts.</note>
From this point the kings of Judah act as religious heads
of the whole nation and territory of Israel. Hezekiah
sent invitations to all Israel from Dan to Beersheba.
He made special efforts to secure a favourable response
from the northern tribes, sending letters to Ephraim
and Manasseh, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to the ten tribes under their leadership.
He reminded them that their brethren had gone
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
into captivity because the northern tribes had deserted
the Temple; and held out to them the hope that, if they
worshipped at the Temple and served Jehovah, they
should themselves escape further calamity, and their
brethren and children who had gone into captivity
should return to their own land.
</p>

<p>
<q>So the posts passed from city to city through the
country of Ephraim and Manasseh, even unto Zebulun.</q>
Either Zebulun is used in a broad sense for all the
Galilean tribes, or the phrase <q>from Beersheba to Dan</q>
is merely rhetorical, for to the north, between Zebulun
and Dan, lay the territories of Asher and Naphtali. It
is to be noticed that the tribes beyond Jordan are
nowhere referred to; they had already fallen out of the
history of Israel, and were scarcely remembered in the
time of the chronicler.
</p>

<p>
Hezekiah's appeal to the surviving communities of
the northern kingdom failed: they laughed his
messengers to scorn, and mocked them; but individuals
responded to his invitation in such numbers that they
are spoken of as <q>a multitude of the people, even many
of Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun.</q>
There were also men of Asher among the northern
pilgrims.<note place='foot'>Cf xxx. 11, 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
The pious enthusiasm of Judah stood out in vivid
contrast to the stubborn impenitence of the majority of
the ten tribes. By the grace of God, Judah was of one
heart to observe the feast appointed by Jehovah through
the king and princes, so that there was gathered in
Jerusalem a very great assembly of worshippers,
surpassing even the great gatherings which the chronicler
had witnessed at the annual feasts.
</p>

<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>

<p>
But though the Temple had been cleansed, the Holy
City was not yet free from the taint of idolatry. The
character of the Passover demanded that not only the
Temple, but the whole city, should be pure. The paschal
lamb was eaten at home, and the doorposts of the
house were sprinkled with its blood. But Ahaz had
set up altars at every corner of the city; no devout
Israelite could tolerate the symbols of idolatrous worship
close to the house in which he celebrated the solemn
rites of the Passover. Accordingly before the Passover
was killed these altars were removed.<note place='foot'>xxx. 14; cf. 2 Kings xviii. 4. The chronicler omits the statement
that Hezekiah destroyed Moses's brazen serpent, which the people had
hitherto worshipped. His readers would not have understood how
this corrupt worship survived the reforms of pious kings and priests
who observed the law of Moses.</note>
</p>

<p>
Then the great feast began; but after long years of
idolatry neither the people nor the priests and Levites
were sufficiently familiar with the rites of the festival to
be able to perform them without some difficulty and
confusion. As a rule each head of a household killed
his own lamb; but many of the worshippers, especially
those from the north, were not ceremonially clean: and
this task devolved upon the Levites. The immense
concourse of worshippers and the additional work
thrown upon the Temple ministry must have made
extraordinary demands on their zeal and energy.<note place='foot'>Cf. xxix. 34, xxx. 3.</note>
At first apparently they hesitated, and were inclined to
abstain from discharging their usual duties. A passover
in a month not appointed by Moses, but decided on by
the civil authorities without consulting the priesthood,
might seem a doubtful and dangerous innovation. Recollecting
Azariah's successful assertion of hierarchical
<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>
prerogative against Uzziah, they might be inclined to
attempt a similar resistance to Hezekiah. But the pious
enthusiasm of the people clearly showed that the Spirit
of Jehovah inspired their somewhat irregular zeal; so
that the ecclesiastical officials were shamed out of their
unsympathetic attitude, and came forward to take their
full share and even more than their full share in this
glorious rededication of Israel to Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
But a further difficulty remained: uncleanness not
only disqualified from killing the paschal lambs, but
from taking any part in the Passover; and a multitude
of the people were unclean. Yet it would have been
ungracious and even dangerous to discourage their newborn
zeal by excluding them from the festival; moreover,
many of them were worshippers from among the ten
tribes, who had come in response to a special invitation,
which most of their fellow-countrymen had rejected with
scorn and contempt. If they had been sent back because
they had failed to cleanse themselves according to
a ritual of which they were ignorant, and of which
Hezekiah might have known they would be ignorant,
both the king and his guests would have incurred
measureless ridicule from the impious northerners.
Accordingly they were allowed to take part in the
Passover despite their uncleanness. But this permission
could only be granted with serious apprehensions
as to its consequences. The Law threatened with
death any one who attended the services of the
sanctuary in a state of uncleanness.<note place='foot'>Lev. xv. 31.</note> Possibly there
were already signs of an outbreak of pestilence; at
any rate, the dread of Divine punishment for sacrilegious
presumption would distress the whole assembly and
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>
mar their enjoyment of Divine fellowship. Again it is
no priest or prophet, but the king, the Messiah, who
comes forward as the mediator between God and man.
Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, <q>Jehovah, in His
grace and mercy,<note place='foot'>So Bertheau, i. 1, slightly paraphrasing.</note> pardon every one that setteth his
heart to seek Elohim Jehovah, the God of his fathers,
though he be not cleansed according to the ritual of
the Temple. And Jehovah hearkened to Hezekiah, and
healed the people,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, either healed them from actual
disease or relieved them from the fear of pestilence.
</p>

<p>
And so the feast went on happily and prosperously,
and was prolonged by acclamation for an additional
seven days. During fourteen days king and princes,
priests and Levites, Jews and Israelites, rejoiced before
Jehovah; thousands of bullocks and sheep smoked
upon the altar; and now the priests were not backward:
great numbers purified themselves to serve the popular
devotion. The priests and Levites sang and made
melody to Jehovah, so that the Levites earned the
king's special commendation. The great festival ended
with a solemn benediction: <q>The priests<note place='foot'>A.R.V., with Masoretic text, <q>the priests the Levites</q>; LXX.,
Vulg. Syr., <q>the priests and the Levites.</q> The former is more likely
to be correct. The verse is partly an echo of Deut. xxvi. 15, so that
the chronicler naturally uses the Deuteronomic phrase <q>the priests
the Levites</q>; but he probably does so unconsciously, without intending
to make any special claim for the Levites: hence I have omitted
the word in the text.</note> arose and
blessed the people, and their voice was heard, and their
prayer came to His holy habitation, even unto heaven.</q>
The priests, and through them the people, received the
assurance that their solemn and prolonged worship had
met with gracious acceptance.
</p>

<p>
We have already more than once had occasion to
<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
consider the chronicler's main theme: the importance of
the Temple, its ritual, and its ministers. Incidentally
and perhaps unconsciously, he here suggests another
lesson, which is specially significant as coming from an
ardent ritualist, namely the necessary limitations of
uniformity in ritual. Hezekiah's celebration of the
Passover is full of irregularities: it is held in the wrong
month; it is prolonged to twice the usual period; there
are amongst the worshippers multitudes of unclean
persons, whose presence at these services ought to have
been visited with terrible punishment. All is condoned
on the ground of emergency, and the ritual laws are set
aside without consulting the ecclesiastical officials.
Everything serves to emphasise the lesson we touched
on in connection with David's sacrifices at the threshing-floor
of Ornan the Jebusite: ritual is made for man,
and not man for ritual. Complete uniformity may be
insisted on in ordinary times, but can be dispensed with
in any pressing emergency; necessity knows no law,
not even the Torah of the Pentateuch. Moreover, in
such emergencies it is not necessary to wait for the initiative
or even the sanction of ecclesiastical officials; the
supreme authority in the Church in all its great crises
resides in the whole body of believers. No one is entitled
to speak with greater authority on the limitations
of ritual than a strong advocate of the sanctity of ritual
like the chronicler; and we may well note, as one of the
most conspicuous marks of his inspiration, the sanctified
common sense shown by his frank and sympathetic
record of the irregularities of Hezekiah's passover.
Doubtless emergencies had arisen even in his own
experience of the great feasts of the Temple that had
taught him this lesson; and it says much for the
healthy tone of the Temple community in his day that
<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>
he does not attempt to reconcile the practice of Hezekiah
with the law of Moses by any harmonistic quibbles.
</p>

<p>
The work of purification and restoration, however, was
still incomplete: the Temple had been cleansed from the
pollutions of idolatry, the heathen altars had been
removed from Jerusalem, but the high places remained
in all the cities of Judah. When the Passover was at
last finished, the assembled multitude, <q>all Israel that
were present,</q> set out, like the English or Scotch
Puritans, on a great iconoclastic expedition. Throughout
the length and breadth of the Land of Promise,
throughout Judah and Benjamin, Ephraim and Manasseh,
they brake in pieces the sacred pillars, and hewed down
the Asherim, and brake down the high places and
altars; then they went home.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Hezekiah was engaged in reorganising
the priests and Levites and arranging for the payment
and distribution of the sacred dues. The king set
an example of liberality by making provision for the
daily, weekly, monthly, and festival offerings. The
people were not slow to imitate him; they brought first-fruits
and tithes in such abundance that four months
were spent in piling up heaps of offerings.
</p>

<p>
<q>Thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah; and he
wrought that which was good, and right, and faithful
before Jehovah his God; and in every work that he
began in the service of the Temple, and in the Law, and
in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it with
all his heart, and brought it to a successful issue.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then follow an account of the deliverance from
Sennacherib and of Hezekiah's recovery from sickness,
a reference to his undue pride in the matter of the
embassy from Babylon, and a description of the
prosperity of his reign, all for the most part abridged
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
from the book of Kings. The prophet Isaiah, however,
is almost ignored. A few of the more important
modifications deserve some little attention. We are
told that the Assyrian invasion was <q>after these things
and this faithfulness,</q> in order that we may not forget
that the Divine deliverance was a recompense for
Hezekiah's loyalty to Jehovah. While the book of
Kings tells us that Sennacherib took all the fenced
cities of Judah, the chronicler feels that even this
measure of misfortune would not have been allowed to
befall a king who had just reconciled Israel to Jehovah,
and merely says that Sennacherib purposed to break
these cities up.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler<note place='foot'>xxxii. 2-8, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> has preserved an account of the
measures taken by Hezekiah for the defence of his
capital: how he stopped up the fountains and watercourses
outside the city, so that a besieging army might
not find water, and repaired and strengthened the
walls, and encouraged his people to trust in Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
Probably the stopping of the water supply outside
the walls was connected with an operation mentioned at
the close of the narrative of Hezekiah's reign: <q>Hezekiah
also stopped the upper spring of the waters of Gihon,
and brought them straight down on the west side of
the city of David.</q><note place='foot'>xxxii. 30.</note> Moreover, the chronicler's statements
are based upon 2 Kings xx. 20, where it is
said that <q>Hezekiah made the pool and the conduit
and brought water into the city.</q> The chronicler was
of course intimately acquainted with the topography
of Jerusalem in his own days, and uses his knowledge
to interpret and expand the statement in the book of
Kings. He was possibly guided in part by Isa. xxii.
<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>
9, 11, where the <q>gathering together the waters of the
lower pool</q> and the <q>making a reservoir between the
two walls for the water of the old pool</q> are mentioned
as precautions taken in view of a probable Assyrian
siege. The recent investigations of the Palestine
Exploration Fund have led to the discovery of aqueducts,
and stoppages, and diversions of watercourses which
are said to correspond to the operations mentioned
by the chronicler. If this be the case, they show a
very accurate knowledge on his part of the topography
of Jerusalem in his own day, and also illustrate his
care to utilise all existing evidence in order to obtain
a clear and accurate interpretation of the statements
of his authority.
</p>

<p>
The reign of Hezekiah appears a suitable opportunity
to introduce a few remarks on the importance
which the chronicler attaches to the music of the
Temple services. Though the music is not more prominent
with him than with some earlier kings, yet in
the case of David, Solomon, and Jehoshaphat other
subjects presented themselves for special treatment;
and Hezekiah's reign being the last in which the music
of the sanctuary is specially dwelt upon, we are able
here to review the various references to this subject.
For the most part the chronicler tells his story of the
virtuous days of the good kings to a continual accompaniment
of Temple music. We hear of the playing
and singing when the Ark was brought to the house
of Obed-edom; when it was taken into the city of
David; at the dedication of the Temple; at the battle
between Abijah and Jeroboam; at Asa's reformation;
in connection with the overthrow of the Ammonites,
Moabites, and Meunim in the reign of Jehoshaphat; at
the coronation of Joash; at Hezekiah's feasts; and
<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
again, though less emphatically, at Josiah's passover.
No doubt the special prominence given to the subject
indicates a professional interest on the part of the
author. If, however, music occupies an undue proportion
of his space, and he has abridged accounts of
more important matters to make room for his favourite
theme, yet there is no reason to suppose that his
actual statements overrate the extent to which music
was used in worship or the importance attached to it.
The older narratives refer to the music in the case of
David and Joash, and assign psalms and songs to
David and Solomon. Moreover, Judaism is by no
means alone in its fondness for music, but shares this
characteristic with almost all religions.
</p>

<p>
We have spoken of the chronicler so far chiefly as
a professional musician, but it should be clearly understood
that the term must be taken in its best sense.
He was by no means so absorbed in the technique of
his art as to forget its sacred significance; he was not
less a worshipper himself because he was the minister
or agent of the common worship. His accounts of
the festivals show a hearty appreciation of the entire
ritual; and his references to the music do not give us
the technical circumstances of its production, but rather
emphasise its general effect. The chronicler's sense of
the religious value of music is largely that of a devout
worshipper, who is led to set forth for the benefit of
others a truth which is the fruit of his own experience.
This experience is not confined to trained musicians;
indeed, a scientific knowledge of the art may sometimes
interfere with its devotional influence. Criticism may
take the place of worship; and the hearer, instead of
yielding to the sacred suggestions of hymn or anthem,
may be distracted by his æsthetic judgment as to the
<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>
merits of the composition and the skill shown by its
rendering. In the same way critical appreciation of
voice, elocution, literary style, and intellectual power
does not always conduce to edification from a sermon.
In the truest culture, however, sensitiveness to these
secondary qualities has become habitual and automatic,
and blends itself imperceptibly with the religious consciousness
of spiritual influence. The latter is thus
helped by excellence and only slightly hindered by
minor defects in the natural means. But the very
absence of any great scientific knowledge of music
may leave the spirit open to the spell which sacred
music is intended to exercise, so that all cheerful and
guileless souls may be <q>moved with concord of sweet
sounds,</q> and sad and weary hearts find comfort in
subdued strains that breathe sympathy of which words
are incapable.
</p>

<p>
Music, as a mode of utterance moving within the
restraints of a regular order, naturally attaches itself
to ritual. As the earliest literature is poetry, the
earliest liturgy is musical. Melody is the simplest
and most obvious means by which the utterances of
a body of worshippers can be combined into a seemly
act of worship. The mere repetition of the same words
by a congregation in ordinary speech is apt to be
wanting in impressiveness or even in decorum; the
use of tune enables a congregation to unite in worship
even when many of its members are strangers to each
other.
</p>

<p>
Again, music may be regarded as an expansion of
language: not new dialect, but a collection of symbols
that can express thought, and more especially emotion,
for which mere speech has no vocabulary. This new
form of language naturally becomes an auxiliary of
<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>
religion. Words are clumsy instruments for the expression
of the heart, and are least efficient when they
undertake to set forth moral and spiritual ideas. Music
can transcend mere speech in touching the soul to fine
issues, suggesting visions of things ineffable and
unseen.
</p>

<p>
Browning makes Abt Vogler say of the most
enduring and supreme hopes that God has granted to
men, <q>'Tis we musicians know</q>; but the message of
music comes home with power to many who have no
skill in its art.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. Manasseh: Repentance And Forgiveness.
2 Chron. xxxiii.</head>

<p>
In telling the melancholy story of the wickedness of
Manasseh in the first period of his reign, the
chronicler reproduces the book of Kings, with one or
two omissions and other slight alterations. He omits
the name of Manasseh's mother; she was called
Hephzi-bah&mdash;<q>My pleasure is in her.</q> In any case,
when the son of a godly father turns out badly, and
nothing is known about the mother, uncharitable people
might credit her with his wickedness. But the chronicler's
readers were familiar with the great influence of
the queen-mother in Oriental states. When they read
that the son of Hezekiah came to the throne at the age
of twelve and afterwards gave himself up to every form
of idolatry, they would naturally ascribe his departure
from his father's ways to the suggestions of his mother.
The chronicler is not willing that the pious Hezekiah
should lie under the imputation of having taken delight
in an ungodly woman, and so her name is omitted.
</p>

<p>
The contents of 2 Kings xxi. 10-16 are also omitted;
they consist of a prophetic utterance and further
particulars as to the sins of Manasseh; they are virtually
replaced by the additional information in Chronicles.
</p>

<p>
From the point of view of the chronicler, the history
<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>
of Manasseh in the book of Kings was far from
satisfactory. The earlier writer had not only failed to
provide materials from which a suitable moral could
be deduced, but he had also told the story so that
undesirable conclusions might be drawn. Manasseh
sinned more wickedly than any other king of Judah:
Ahaz merely polluted and closed the Temple, but
Manasseh <q>built altars for all the host of heaven in
the two courts of the Temple,</q> and set up in it an
idol. And yet in the earlier narrative this most wicked
king escaped without any personal punishment at all.
Moreover, length of days was one of the rewards which
Jehovah was wont to bestow upon the righteous; but
while Ahaz was cut off at thirty-six, in the prime of
manhood, Manasseh survived to the mature age of
sixty-seven, and reigned fifty-five years.
</p>

<p>
However, the history reached the chronicler in a
more satisfactory form. Manasseh was duly punished,
and his long reign fully accounted for.<note place='foot'>xxxiii. 11-19, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> When, in spite
of Divine warning, Manasseh and his people persisted
in their sin, Jehovah sent against them <q>the captains
of the host of the king of Assyria, which took Manasseh
in chains, and bound him with fetters,<note place='foot'>So R.V.: A.V., <q>among the thorns</q>; R.V. marg., <q>with hooks</q>, if
so in a figurative sense. Others take the word as a proper name:
Hohim.</note> and carried him
to Babylon.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Assyrian invasion referred to here is partially
confirmed by the fact that the name of Manasseh occurs
amongst the tributaries of Esarhaddon and his
successor, Assur-bani-pal. The mention of Babylon as
his place of captivity rather than Nineveh may be
accounted for by supposing that Manasseh was taken
<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>
prisoner in the reign of Esarhaddon. This king of
Assyria rebuilt Babylon, and spent much of his time
there. He is said to have been of a kindly disposition
and to have exercised towards other royal captives the
same clemency which he extended to Manasseh. For
the Jewish king's misfortunes led him to repentance:
<q>When he was in trouble, he besought Jehovah his God,
and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers, and prayed unto him.</q> Amongst the Greek
Apocrypha is found a <q>Prayer of Manasses,</q> doubtless
intended by its author to represent the prayer referred
to in Chronicles. In it Manasseh celebrates the Divine
glory, confesses his great wickedness, and asks that his
penitence may be accepted and that he may obtain
deliverance.
</p>

<p>
If these were the terms of Manasseh's prayers,
they were heard and answered; and the captive
king returned to Jerusalem a devout worshipper and
faithful servant of Jehovah. He at once set to work
to undo the evil he had wrought in the former period
of his reign. He took away the idol and the heathen
altars from the Temple, restored the altar of Jehovah,
and re-established the Temple services. In earlier
days he had led the people into idolatry; now he
commanded them to serve Jehovah, and the people
obediently followed the king's example. Apparently
he found it impracticable to interfere with the high
places; but they were so far purified from corruption
that, though the people still sacrificed at these illegal
sanctuaries, they worshipped exclusively Jehovah, the
God of Israel.
</p>

<p>
Like most of the pious kings, his prosperity was
partly shown by his extensive building operations.
Following in the footsteps of Jotham, he strengthened
<pb n='447'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>
or repaired the fortifications of Jerusalem, especially
about Ophel. He further provided for the safety
of his dominions by placing captains, and doubtless
also garrisons, in the fenced cities of Judah. The
interest taken by the Jews of the second Temple in the
history of Manasseh is shown by the fact that the
chronicler is able to mention, not only the <q>Acts of the
Kings of Israel,</q> but a second authority: <q>The History
of the Seers.</q> The imagination of the Targumists and
other later writers embellished the history of Manasseh's
captivity and release with many striking and romantic
circumstances.
</p>

<p>
The life of Manasseh practically completes the
chronicler's series of object-lessons in the doctrine of
retribution; the history of the later kings only provides
illustrations similar to those already given. These
object-lessons are closely connected with the teaching
of Ezekiel. In dealing with the question of heredity in
guilt, the prophet is led to set forth the character and
fortunes of four different classes of men. First<note place='foot'>Ezek. xviii. 20.</note> we
have two simple cases: the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of
the wicked shall be upon him. These have been
respectively illustrated by the prosperity of Solomon
and Jotham and the misfortunes of Jehoram, Ahaziah,
Athaliah, and Ahaz. Again, departing somewhat from
the order of Ezekiel&mdash;<q>When the righteous turneth
away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity,
and doeth according to all the abominations of the
wicked man, shall he live? None of his righteous deeds
that he hath done shall be remembered; in his trespass
that he hath trespassed and in his sin that he hath
<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/>
sinned he shall die</q>&mdash;here we have the principle that
in Chronicles governs the Divine dealings with the
kings who began to reign well and then fell away into
sin: Asa, Joash, Amaziah, and Uzziah.
</p>

<p>
We reached this point in our discussion of the
doctrine of retribution in connection with Asa. So far
the lessons taught were salutary: they might deter from
sin; but they were gloomy and depressing: they gave
little encouragement to hope for success in the struggle
after righteousness, and suggested that few would
escape terrible penalties of failure. David and Solomon
formed a class by themselves; an ordinary man could
not aspire to their almost supernatural virtue. In his
later history the chronicler is chiefly bent on illustrating
the frailty of man and the wrath of God. The
New Testament teaches a similar lesson when it asks,
<q>If the righteous is scarcely saved, where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear?</q><note place='foot'>Peter iv. 18.</note> But in Chronicles not
even the righteous is saved. Again and again we are
told at a king's accession that he <q>did that which was
good and right in the eyes of Jehovah</q>; and yet before
the reign closes he forfeits the Divine favour, and at
last dies ruined and disgraced.
</p>

<p>
But this sombre picture is relieved by occasional
gleams of light. Ezekiel furnishes a fourth type of
religious experience: <q>If the wicked turn from all his
sins that he hath committed, and keep all My statutes,
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall live; he
shall not die. None of his transgressions that he hath
committed shall be remembered against him; in his
righteousness that he hath done he shall live. Have
I any pleasure in the death of the wicked, saith the
<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>
Lord Jehovah, and not rather that he should return
from his way and live?</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xviii. 21-23.</note> The one striking and
complete example of this principle is the history of
Manasseh. It is true that Rehoboam also repented,
but the chronicler does not make it clear that his
repentance was permanent. Manasseh is unique alike
in extreme wickedness, sincere penitence, and thorough
reformation. The reformation of Julius Cæsar or of our
Henry V., or, to take a different class of instance, the
conversion of St. Paul, was nothing compared to the
conversion of Manasseh. It was as though Herod
the Great or Cæsar Borgia had been checked midway
in a career of cruelty and vice, and had thenceforward
lived pure and holy lives, glorifying God by ministering
to their fellow-men. Such a repentance gives us hope
for the most abandoned. In the forgiveness of
Manasseh the penitent sinner receives assurance that
God will forgive even the most guilty. The account of
his closing years shows that even a career of desperate
wickedness in the past need not hinder the penitent
from rendering acceptable service to God and ending
his life in the enjoyment of Divine favour and blessing.
Manasseh becomes in the Old Testament what the
Prodigal Son is in the New: the one great symbol of
the possibilities of human nature and the infinite mercy
of God.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler's theology is as simple and straightforward
as that of Ezekiel. Manasseh repents, submits
himself, and is forgiven. His captivity apparently had
expiated his guilt, as far as expiation was necessary.
Neither prophet nor chronicler was conscious of the
moral difficulties that have been found in so simple a
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>
plan of salvation. The problems of an objective atonement
had not yet risen above their horizon.
</p>

<p>
These incidents afford another illustration of the
necessary limitations of ritual. In the great crisis of
Manasseh's spiritual life, the Levitical ordinances played
no part; they moved on a lower level, and ministered to
less urgent needs. Probably the worship of Jehovah
was still suspended during Manasseh's captivity; none
the less Manasseh was able to make his peace with God.
Even if they were punctually observed, of what use were
services at the Temple in Jerusalem to a penitent
sinner at Babylon? When Manasseh returned to Jerusalem,
he restored the Temple worship, and offered
sacrifices of peace-offerings and of thanksgiving;
nothing is said about sin-offerings. His sacrifices were
not the condition of his pardon, but the seal and token
of a reconciliation already effected. The experience of
Manasseh anticipated that of the Jews of the Captivity:
he discovered the possibility of fellowship with Jehovah,
far away from the Holy Land, without temple, priest,
or sacrifice. The chronicler, perhaps unconsciously
already foreshadows the coming of the hour when men
should worship the Father neither in the holy mountain
of Samaria nor yet in Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
Before relating the outward acts which testified the
sincerity of Manasseh's repentance, the chronicler devotes
a single sentence to the happy influence of forgiveness
and deliverance upon Manasseh himself.
When his prayer had been heard, and his exile was at
an end, then Manasseh knew and acknowledged that
Jehovah was God. Men first begin to know God
when they have been forgiven. The alienated and
disobedient, if they think of Him at all, merely have
glimpses of His vengeance and try to persuade themselves
<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
that He is a stern Tyrant. By the penitent
not yet assured of the possibility of reconciliation God
is chiefly thought of as a righteous Judge. What
did the Prodigal Son know about his father when
he asked for the portion of goods that fell to him or
while he was wasting his substance in riotous living?
Even when he came to himself, he thought of the
father's house as a place where there was bread
enough and to spare; and he supposed that his father
might endure to see him living at home in permanent
disgrace, on the footing of a hired servant. When he
reached home, after he had been met a great way on
with compassion and been welcomed with an embrace,
he began for the first time to understand his father's
character. So the knowledge of God's love dawns
upon the soul in the blessed experience of forgiveness;
and because love and forgiveness are more strange
and unearthly than rebuke and chastisement, the sinner
is humbled by pardon far more than by punishment;
and his trembling submission to the righteous Judge
deepens into profounder reverence and awe for the
God who can forgive, who is superior to all vindictiveness,
whose infinite resources enable Him to blot
out the guilt, to cancel the penalty, and annul the
consequences of sin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>There is forgiveness with Thee,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>That Thou mayest be feared.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm cxxx. 4, probably belonging to about the same period as
Chronicles.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The words that stand in the forefront of the Lord's
Prayer, <q>Hallowed be Thy name,</q> are virtually a
petition that sinners may repent, and be converted, and
obtain forgiveness.
</p>

<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>

<p>
In seeking for a Christian parallel to the doctrine
expounded by Ezekiel and illustrated by Chronicles,
we have to remember that the permanent elements in
primitive doctrine are often to be found by removing
the limitations which imperfect faith has imposed on
the possibilities of human nature and Divine mercy.
We have already suggested that the chronicler's somewhat
rigid doctrine of temporal rewards and punishments
symbolises the inevitable influence of conduct
on the development of character. The doctrine of
God's attitude towards backsliding and repentance
seems somewhat arbitrary as set forth by Ezekiel and
Chronicles. A man apparently is not to be judged by
his whole life, but only by the moral period that is
closed by his death. If his last years be pious, his
former transgressions are forgotten; if his last years
be evil, his righteous deeds are equally forgotten.
While we gratefully accept the forgiveness of sinners,
such teaching as to backsliders seems a little cynical;
and though, by God's grace and discipline, a man
may be led through and out of sin into righteousness,
we are naturally suspicious of a life of <q>righteous
deeds</q> which towards its close lapses into gross and
open sin. <q>Nemo repente turpissimus fit.</q> We are
inclined to believe that the final lapse reveals the true
bias of the whole character. But the chronicler suggests
more than this: by his history of the almost uniform
failure of the pious kings to persevere to the end, he
seems to teach that the piety of early and mature life is
either unreal or else is unable to survive as body and
mind wear out. This doctrine has sometimes, inconsiderately
no doubt, been taught from Christian pulpits;
and yet the truth of which the doctrine is a misrepresentation
supplies a correction of the former principle
<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
that a life is to be judged by its close. Putting aside
any question of positive sin, a man's closing years
sometimes seem cold, narrow, and selfish when once
he was full of tender and considerate sympathy; and
yet the man is no Asa or Amaziah who has deserted
the living God for idols of wood and stone. The man
has not changed, only our impression of him. Unconsciously
we are influenced by the contrast between his
present state and the splendid energy and devotion of
self-sacrifice that marked his prime; we forget that
inaction is his misfortune, and not his fault; we
overrate his ardour in the days when vigorous action
was a delight for its own sake; and we overlook the
quiet heroism with which remnants of strength are still
utilised in the Lord's service, and do not consider that
moments of fretfulness are due to decay and disease
that at once increase the need of patience and diminish
the powers of endurance. Muscles and nerves slowly
become less and less efficient; they fail to carry to the
soul full and clear reports of the outside world; they are
no longer satisfactory instruments by which the soul can
express its feelings or execute its will. We are less
able than ever to estimate the inner life of such by that
which we see and hear. While we are thankful for the
sweet serenity and loving sympathy which often make
the hoary head a crown of glory, we are also entitled
to judge some of God's more militant children by their
years of arduous service, and not by their impatience of
enforced inactivity.
</p>

<p>
If our author's statement of these truths seem unsatisfactory,
we must remember that his lack of a doctrine
of the future life placed him at a serious disadvantage.
He wished to exhibit a complete picture of God's
dealings with the characters of his history, so that
<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>
their lives should furnish exact illustrations of the
working of sin and righteousness. He was controlled
and hampered by the idea that underlies many discussions
in the Old Testament: that God's righteous
judgment upon a man's actions is completely manifested
during his earthly life. It may be possible to assert an
<emph>eternal</emph> providence; but conscience and heart have long
since revolted against the doctrine that God's justice, to
say nothing of His love, is declared by the misery of
lives that might have been innocent, if they had ever
had the opportunity of knowing what innocence meant.
The chronicler worked on too small a scale for his
subject. The entire Divine economy of Him with
whom a thousand years are as one day cannot be even
outlined for a single soul in the history of its earthly
existence. These narratives of Jewish kings are only
imperfect symbols of the infinite possibilities of the
eternal providence. The moral of Chronicles is very
much that of the Greek sage, <q>Call no man happy till
he is dead</q>; but since Christ has brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel, we no longer
pass final judgment upon either the man or his happiness
by what we know of his life here. The decisive
revelation of character, the final judgment upon conduct,
the due adjustment of the gifts and discipline of God,
are deferred to a future life. When these are completed,
and the soul has attained to good or evil beyond
all reversal, then we shall feel, with Ezekiel and the
chronicler, that there is no further need to remember
either the righteous deeds or the transgressions of
earlier stages of its history.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='455'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. The Last Kings Of Judah.
2 Chron. xxxiv.-xxxvi.</head>

<p>
Whatever influence Manasseh's reformation
exercised over his people generally, the taint
of idolatry was not removed from his own family.
His son Amon succeeded him at the age of two-and-twenty.
Into his reign of two years he compressed
all the varieties of wickedness once practised
by his father, and undid the good work of Manasseh's
later years. He recovered the graven images which
Manasseh had discarded, replaced them in their shrines,
and worshipped them instead of Jehovah. But in his case
there was no repentance, and he was cut off in his youth.
</p>

<p>
In the absence of any conclusive evidence as to the
date of Manasseh's reformation, we cannot determine
with certainty whether Amon received his early training
before or after his father returned to the worship of
Jehovah. In either case Manasseh's earlier history
would make it difficult for him to counteract any evil
influence that drew Amon towards idolatry. Amon
could set the example and perhaps the teaching of his
father's former days against any later exhortations to
righteousness. When a father has helped to lead his
children astray, he cannot be sure that he will carry
them with him in his repentance.
</p>

<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>

<p>
After Amon's assassination the people placed his son
Josiah on the throne. Like Joash and Manasseh, Josiah
was a child, only eight years old. The chronicler
follows the general line of the history in the book of
Kings, modifying, abridging, and expanding, but introducing
no new incidents; the reformation, the repairing
of the Temple, the discovery of the book of the Law,
the Passover, Josiah's defeat and death at Megiddo, are
narrated by both historians. We have only to notice
differences in a somewhat similar treatment of the same
subject.
</p>

<p>
Beyond the general statement that Josiah <q>did that
which was right in the eyes of Jehovah</q> we hear
nothing about him in the book of Kings till the
eighteenth year of his reign, and his reformation and
putting away of idolatry is placed in that year. The
chronicler's authorities corrected the statement that
the pious king tolerated idolatry for eighteen years.
They record how in the eighth year of his reign, when
he was sixteen, he began to seek after the God of
David; and in his twelfth year he set about the work of
utterly destroying idols throughout the whole territory
of Israel, in the cities and ruins of Manasseh, Ephraim,
and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, as well as in Judah
and Benjamin. Seeing that the cities assigned to
Simeon were in the south of Judah, it is a little
difficult to understand why they appear with the
northern tribes, unless they are reckoned with them
technically to make up the ancient number.
</p>

<p>
The consequence of this change of date is that in
Chronicles the reformation precedes the discovery of
the book of the Law, whereas in the older history this
discovery is the cause of the reformation. The
chronicler's account of the idols and other apparatus of
<pb n='457'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>
false worship destroyed by Josiah is much less detailed
than that of the book of Kings. To have reproduced
the earlier narrative in full would have raised serious
difficulties. According to the chronicler, Manasseh had
purged Jerusalem of idols and idol altars; and Amon
alone was responsible for any that existed there at the
accession of Josiah: but in the book of Kings Josiah
found in Jerusalem the altars erected by the kings
of Judah and the horses they had given to the sun.
Manasseh's altars still stood in the courts of the
Temple; and over against Jerusalem there still remained
the high places that Solomon had built for
Ashtoreth, Chemosh, and Milcom. As the chronicler in
describing Solomon's reign carefully omitted all mention
of his sins, so he omits this reference to his idolatry.
Moreover, if he had inserted it, he would have had to
explain how these high places escaped the zeal of the
many pious kings who did away with the high places.
Similarly, having omitted the account of the man of
God who prophesied the ruin of Jeroboam's sanctuary at
Bethel, he here omits the fulfilment of that prophecy.
</p>

<p>
The account of the repairing of the Temple is
enlarged by the insertion of various details as to the
names, functions, and zeal of the Levites, amongst
whom those who had skill in instruments of music
seem to have had the oversight of the workmen. We
are reminded of the walls of Thebes, which rose out
of the ground while Orpheus played upon his flute.
Similarly in the account of the assembly called to hear
the contents of the book of the Law the Levites are
substituted for the prophets. This book of the Law is
said in Chronicles to have been given by Moses, but
his name is not connected with the book in the parallel
narrative in the book of Kings.
</p>

<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>

<p>
The earlier authority simply states that Josiah held a
great passover; Chronicles, as usual, describes the
festival in detail. First of all, the king commanded the
priests and Levites to purify themselves and take their
places in due order, so that they might be ready to perform
their sacred duties. The narrative is very obscure,
but it seems that either during the apostacy of Amon or
on account of the recent Temple repairs the Ark had been
removed from the Holy of holies. The Law had specially
assigned to the Levites the duty of carrying the Tabernacle
and its furniture, and they seem to have thought
that they were only bound to exercise the function of
carrying the Ark; they perhaps proposed to bear it in
solemn procession round the city as part of the celebration
of the Passover, forgetting the words of David<note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxiii. 26, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> that the
Levites should no more carry the Tabernacle and its
vessels. They would have been glad to substitute this
conspicuous and honourable service for the laborious
and menial work of flaying the victims. Josiah, however,
commanded them to put the Ark into the Temple
and attend to their other duties.
</p>

<p>
Next, the king and his nobles provided beasts of
various kinds for the sacrifices and the Passover meal.
Josiah's gifts were even more munificent than those of
Hezekiah. The latter had given a thousand bullocks
and ten thousand sheep; Josiah gave just three times as
many. Moreover, at Hezekiah's passover no offerings
of the princes are mentioned, but now they added their
gifts to those of the king. The heads of the priesthood
provided three hundred oxen and two thousand six
hundred small cattle for the priests, and the chiefs of
the Levites five hundred oxen and five thousand small
<pb n='459'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>
cattle for the Levites. But numerous as were the
victims at Josiah's passover, they still fell far short of
the great sacrifice<note place='foot'>2 Chron. vii. 5. The figures are peculiar to Chronicles; 1 Kings
viii. 5 says that the victims could not be counted.</note> of twenty-two thousand oxen and a
hundred and twenty thousand sheep which Solomon
offered at the dedication of the Temple.
</p>

<p>
Then began the actual work of the sacrifices: the
victims were killed and flayed, and their blood was
sprinkled on the altar; the burnt offerings were
distributed among the people; the Passover lambs were
roasted, and the other offerings boiled, and the Levites
<q>carried them quickly to all the children of the people.</q>
Apparently private individuals could not find the means
of cooking the bountiful provision made for them;
and, to meet the necessity of the case, the Temple
courts were made kitchen as well as slaughterhouse
for the assembled worshippers. The other offerings
would not be eaten with the Passover lamb, but would
serve for the remaining days of the feast.
</p>

<p>
The Levites not only provided for the people, for
themselves, and the priests, but the Levites who
ministered in the matter of the sacrifices also prepared
for their brethren who were singers and porters, so that
the latter were enabled to attend undisturbed to their
own special duties; all the members of the guild of
porters were at the gates maintaining order among the
crowd of worshippers; and the full strength of the
orchestra and choir contributed to the beauty and
solemnity of the services. It was the greatest Passover
held by any Israelite king.
</p>

<p>
Josiah's passover, like that of Hezekiah, was followed
by a formidable foreign invasion; but whereas
<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>
Hezekiah was rewarded for renewed loyalty by a
triumphant deliverance, Josiah was defeated and slain.
These facts subject the chronicler's theory of retribution
to a severe strain. His perplexity finds pathetic
expression in the opening words of the new section,
<q>After all this,</q> after all the idols had been put
away, after the celebration of the most magnificent
Passover the monarchy had ever seen. After all this,
when we looked for the promised rewards of piety&mdash;for
fertile seasons, peace and prosperity at home, victory
and dominion abroad, tribute from subject peoples, and
wealth from successful commerce&mdash;after all this, the
rout of the armies of Jehovah at Megiddo, the flight
and death of the wounded king, the lamentation over
Josiah, the exaltation of a nominee of Pharaoh to the
throne, and the payment of tribute to the Egyptian king.
The chronicler has no complete explanation of this
painful mystery, but he does what he can to meet the
difficulties of the case. Like the great prophets in
similar instances, he regards the heathen king as charged
with a Divine commission. Pharaoh's appeal to Josiah
to remain neutral should have been received by the
Jewish king as an authoritative message from Jehovah.
It was the failure to discern in a heathen king the
mouthpiece and prophet of Jehovah that cost Josiah
his life and Judah its liberty.
</p>

<p>
The chronicler had no motive for lingering over the last
sad days of the monarchy; the rest of his narrative is
almost entirely abridged from the book of Kings. Jehoahaz,
Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah pass over the
scene in rapid and melancholy succession. In the case
of Jehoahaz, who only reigned three months, the chronicler
omits the unfavourable judgment recorded in the
book of Kings; but he repeats it for the other three,
<pb n='461'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>
even for the poor lad of eight<note place='foot'>Jehoiachin. The ordinary reading in 2 Kings xxiv. makes him
eighteen.</note> who was carried away
captive after a reign of three months and ten days. The
chronicler had not learnt that kings can do no wrong;
on the other hand, the ungodly policy of Jehoiachin's
ministers is labelled with the name of the boy-sovereign.
</p>

<p>
Each of these kings in turn was deposed and carried
away into captivity, unless indeed Jehoiakim is an
exception. In the book of Kings we are told that he
slept with his fathers, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that he died and was buried
in the royal tombs at Jerusalem, a statement which
the LXX. inserts here also, specifying, however, that
he was buried in the garden of Uzza. If the pious
Josiah were punished for a single error by defeat and
death, why was the wicked Jehoiakim allowed to reign
till the end of his life and then die in his bed? The
chronicler's information differed from that of the
earlier narrative in a way that removed, or at any rate
suppressed the difficulty. He omits the statement that
Jehoiakim slept with his fathers, and tells us<note place='foot'>2 xxxvi. 6<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, peculiar to Chronicles.</note> that
Nebuchadnezzar bound him in fetters to carry him to
Babylon. Casual readers would naturally suppose
that this purpose was carried out, and that the Divine
justice was satisfied by Jehoiakim's death in captivity;
and yet if they compared this passage with that in
the book of Kings, it might occur to them that after
the king had been put in chains something might have
led Nebuchadnezzar to change his mind, or, like
Manasseh, Jehoiakim might have repented and been
allowed to return. But it is very doubtful whether
the chronicler's authorities contemplated the possibility
of such an interpretation; it is scarcely fair to credit
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>
them with all the subtle devices of modern commentators.
</p>

<p>
The real conclusion of the chronicler's history of the
kings of the house of David is a summary of the sins
of the last days of the monarchy and of the history of
its final ruin in xxxvi. 14-20.<note place='foot'>Mostly peculiar to Chronicles.</note> All the chief of the priests
and of the people were given over to the abominations
of idolatry; and in spite of constant and urgent admonitions
from the prophets of Jehovah, they hardened
their hearts, and mocked the messengers of God, and
despised His words, and misused His prophets, until
the wrath of Jehovah arose against His people, and
there was no healing.
</p>

<p>
However, to this peroration a note is added that the
length of the Captivity was fixed at seventy years, in
order that the land might <q>enjoy her sabbaths.</q> This
note rests upon Lev. xxv. 1-7, according to which
the land was to be left fallow every seventh year. The
seventy years captivity would compensate for seventy
periods of six years each during which no sabbatical
years had been observed. Thus the Captivity, with the
four hundred and twenty previous years of neglect,
would be equivalent to seventy sabbatical periods.
There is no economy in keeping back what is due to
God.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the editor who separated Chronicles from
the book of Ezra and Nehemiah was loath to allow the
first part of the history to end in a gloomy record of
sin and ruin. Modern Jews, in reading the last chapter
of Isaiah, rather than conclude with the ill-omened
words of the last two verses, repeat a previous portion
of the chapter. So here to the history of the ruin of
<pb n='463'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>
Jerusalem the editor has appended two verses from the
opening of the book of Ezra, which contain the decree
of Cyrus authorising the return from the Captivity.
And thus Chronicles concludes in the middle of a
sentence which is completed in the book of Ezra:
<q>Who is there among you of all his people? Jehovah
his God be with him, and let him go up....</q>
</p>

<p>
Such a conclusion suggests two considerations which
will form a fitting close to our exposition. Chronicles
is not a finished work; it has no formal end; it rather
breaks off abruptly like an interrupted diary. In like
manner the book of Kings concludes with a note as to
the treatment of the captive Jehoiachin at Babylon: the
last verse runs, <q>And for his allowance there was a
continual allowance given him of the king, every day a
portion, all the days of his life.</q> The book of Nehemiah
has a short final prayer: <q>Remember me, O my God,
for good</q>; but the preceding paragraph is simply
occupied with the arrangements for the wood offering
and the first-fruits. So in the New Testament the
history of the Church breaks off with the statement that
St. Paul abode two whole years in his own hired house,
preaching the kingdom of God. The sacred writers
recognise the continuity of God's dealings with His
people; they do not suggest that one period can be
marked off by a clear dividing line or interval from
another. Each historian leaves, as it were, the loose
ends of his work ready to be taken up and continued
by his successors. The Holy Spirit seeks to stimulate
the Church to a forward outlook, that it may expect and
work for a future wherein the power and grace of God
will be no less manifest than in the past. Moreover,
the final editor of Chronicles has shown himself unwilling
that the book should conclude with a gloomy
<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>
record of sin and ruin, and has appended a few lines to
remind his readers of the new life of faith and hope
that lay beyond the Captivity. In so doing, he has
echoed the key-note of prophecy: ever beyond man's
transgression and punishment the prophets saw the
vision of his forgiveness and restoration to God.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
